The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bob Hazard, Dam Builder, by Carl Brandt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: Bob Hazard, Dam Builder

Author: Carl Brandt

Illustrator: Herbert Morton Stoops

Release Date: November 29, 2020 [EBook #63918]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Juliet Sutherland, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOB HAZARD, DAM BUILDER ***


[Illustration: A second later Bob was climbing through space, faster
than a rocket.]




  Bob Hazard
  Dam Builder

  By
  Carl Brandt

  [Illustration]

  Illustrated by Herbert Morton Stoops


  The Reilly & Britton Co.
  Chicago




  Copyright, 1916
  By
  The Reilly & Britton Co.


  _Bob Hazard, Dam Builder_




CONTENTS


      I FATHER AND SON                 9

     II U. S. R. S.                   19

    III WHEN THE CHIEF WAS AWAY       32

     IV THE LABYRINTH                 44

      V JERRY’S STORY                 78

     VI THE END OF THE LABYRINTH      88

    VII THE PROJECT                   98

   VIII BOB’S CHANCE                 109

     IX THE DAM                      128

      X TED HOYT                     136

     XI TROUBLE                      144

    XII AT THE CABLE TOWER           154

   XIII AN UNEXPECTED ALLY           168

    XIV THE UNMASKING OF JERRY       175

     XV THE CAPTURE OF BOB           194

    XVI THE ESCAPE                   202

   XVII DYNAMITE!                    212

  XVIII THE RAIDERS RAIDED           232

    XIX JERRY COMES BACK             247

     XX THE FUTURE                   264




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  A second later Bob was climbing through
    space, faster than a rocket.                    _Frontispiece_

  “Look out for falls!” Bob shouted.                            70

  A bullet whistled by him. Then came another
    and another.                                               148

  Under his feet he saw the snake-like line
    of fuse. With a leap he pulled the whole
    thing over the bank.                                       230




Bob Hazard, Dam Builder




CHAPTER I

FATHER AND SON


“So you would rather be an engineer than a lawyer, Bob? Is that what
you want to tell me?”

“Yes, sir,--an engineer rather than anything else!”

The speakers were sitting on a bench in the park which surrounds
the old Virginia State House in Richmond. Father and son they were
certainly--the likeness was unmistakable.

The man hesitated a moment before going on with the conversation. When
he spoke it was seemingly from a new angle.

“How old are you now, Bob? Seventeen, isn’t it? Yes, yes, of course.
And in a week or two you will have finished with Crossways for good?”

“Mr. Moseley says I am ready for my college exams, Dad. Tells me that
he can’t take me along any further.”

“And instead of taking the examinations for Harvard and then going
fishing with me, you want to go out West and work on an engineering
corps all summer. After that, what?”

“If you’ll let me, I want to go to Rensselaer and study civil
engineering. I’ll have had some practice then and the theory will come
easier.”

“I see. But, my son, do you realize that if you follow your desire to
be an engineer there will never be the firm of Robert Hazard and Son?
That the practice I have built up will not pass on to you as I have so
often planned? We would have made a great team, my boy, and it’s rather
hard to give up the idea so suddenly. But I see that you must do as you
wish.”

This way of taking it was rather disconcerting to Bob Hazard. He had
hoped his father would be a little angry, perhaps, at the news of his
decision. And if he had, Bob could have stuck to his determination
with more heart, for he would have felt he had been treated a little
unjustly. But his father’s acceptance of the situation left him without
any defense. Besides, the note of disappointment which was so evident,
convinced him that from his father’s standpoint he was ungrateful for
the love and care he had received.

“No, no, Dad!” Bob cried. “We won’t give up the idea! I--didn’t know
you felt that way about it. The engineering can go. I’ll write Whiskers
and tell him I’m not coming. Of course we’ll have the firm of Hazard
and Son and we’ll make rival lawyers sit up and take notice!”

The older Hazard looked at his son with gleaming eyes. What stuff the
lad was made of! An immense pride filled him that this boy could be so
unselfish and destroy his own carefully laid plans for the future with
such a brave attempt at sincerity.

“Thank you, Bob,” he said slowly. “But I can’t let you give up your
ambition for mine. You would not be happy, nor after a time would I,
for I realize that your desire to be an engineer is not just a whim.
You could not be a good lawyer unless your heart were in it, and I
don’t want a son of mine to be anything but a good lawyer, if he’s one
at all. I’d far rather have you a good engineer than an almost good
lawyer. You will have to try out your plan. If it works, well and good;
if it doesn’t, you can still try something else. You are old enough to
decide for yourself, my son.”

“You _are_ a good Dad!” cried Bob, putting an arm around the older
man’s shoulders and hugging him unashamedly. “Whiskers--that is, Steve
Whitney--wrote and told me to report to him as soon as I could. Then I
have your permission to go West just as soon as school closes?”

“Yes,” was the quick answer, although the speaker had hoped that the
boy would suggest spending a week or two with him before he left for
the West. But Bob’s next words cheered him a lot.

“Of course, Dad, I don’t mean to go until we’ve had a chance to see
each other. If you could only come out to Crossways for the next week
or two it would be great! That way, we could visit and still I could
get out on the job just as soon as possible. I don’t want Whiskers to
fill my place just because I don’t show up. But I’ll come up to New
York--”

“You won’t have to do that,” said Mr. Hazard with a smile.

“You mean you can come to Crossways?”

“I do. It just so happens that I can spare a few days right now.
Besides, I’d like to meet the fellows you are always writing about--Tom
and Ned--and see the place where you grew that big crop of corn last
summer.”

Mr. Hazard was as good as his word. The same night found him installed
in the colonial house from which the great plantation of Crossways had
formerly been managed. Now the plantation was a thing of memory only.
Only the house and comparatively few cultivated acres remained of
the once proud estate. Edward Moseley, the last of a long line, kept
a school, which, primarily started for the benefit of his tenants’
children, had become so famous that boys from all parts of the country
were now enrolled.

The summer before, when Mr. Hazard found that it was necessary for
him to make a trip abroad, he had left Bob at Crossways; and to make
things pleasanter he had sent down a canoe, giving it to Tom Wickham
and Ned Moseley, Bob’s chums. Therefore, when he appeared in person,
Tom and Ned were prepared to like him. They were not disappointed.

When he demanded it the boys showed him the island in the low grounds
on which they had grown the test crop of corn.

“It seems to me that you fellows hit on a really excellent plan to
occupy your time during the summer. Who thought of it?” he asked after
examining the plot.

“Tom,” said Ned quickly. “He planned it and we did the work.”

“I reckon I did my share of the work too,” exploded Tom. When the laugh
died down, Mr. Hazard went on with his questions.

“Are you going to plant it again this year?”

“Not this piece, sir,” answered Tom. “I’ve got all I can do helping my
father. When we raised more than double the average yield of his fields
on our little patch here, he decided that there was something in modern
farming methods after all, so this year we’re putting all our corn in
as it should be! And we’re going to have some crop, too!”

“Didn’t you meet Mr. Whitney somewheres around here, Bob?” Mr. Hazard
asked, turning to his son.

Before Bob could answer, Tom Wickham had broken in.

“Mr. Whitney? Oh, you mean ‘Whiskers,’ who put the engineering bug into
Bob’s head, last year. We found him up the river at the cave. Would you
like to go up there?”

Mr. Hazard assented, so they planned the expedition for another day, as
this afternoon was growing old. When they went, however, he was told of
the adventures that had centered around the cave and Whiskers. How they
had come on him by chance and, thinking him an escaped criminal, had
undertaken his capture. This had led to Ned’s being caught instead and
when Bob and Tom had effected the rescue, had resulted in the discovery
of the secret chamber behind the cave. Mr. Hazard was particularly
interested when he heard of the part Whiskers had taken in the defense
of the island and its precious crop from the onslaught of the summer
freshet. They told him that it was not until the crop was safe that
Whiskers had revealed who he was, an engineer in the United States
Reclamation Service. He had hidden himself away until certain unfounded
charges against him were cleared away. These had been brought by
grafters he had found on the job he had in charge.

“Well, Bob,” remarked Mr. Hazard when the tale was done, “you certainly
had a better time here than you would have had if you had gone to
Russia with me!”

Finally Bob’s father had to go back to New York. Several telegrams had
come and the last one could not be disregarded. The night before he
left Mr. Hazard led Bob out into the grounds. When they came to the
fence, they leaned on it and started talking. The moon was up and shed
its light on the flat fields. In the hum of the country stillness, only
the summer whistle of the quail and the sharp plaintive cry of the
whippoorwill were distinct.

“You are determined, Bob?” the older man asked. Bob knew to what his
father referred.

“Yes, sir! Absolutely!”

“You have counted the cost well? There is no great reward in what you
plan to do. There will be no limousines--no luxury in the life you will
lead. A lawyer can have both.”

“I know it, sir!”

The man knew his was a losing fight yet he wanted to struggle on.
Through the years he had watched over his motherless boy, he had
dreamed dreams. He had seen the time when Bob would enter his office,
when he would become a partner and at last when he would take onto his
young shoulders the whole burden of the work. It had been a good dream
and he was loath to give it up. He made one more effort.

“If you find that the work is not as much fun as you expected, will you
come back and tell me so? You won’t stick it out just as a matter of
pride?”

“I can safely promise that, Daddy. You know, don’t you, that I really
would _like_ to be a lawyer if I only could? But I know I’ve just _got_
to try this engineering. If it turns out wrong for me I’ll come back
gladly.”

Both were silent for a few minutes. Then Bob spoke again, his manner
saying more than his words:

“You’ve been bully to me, Dad.”

“You are all I’ve got, son,” was the quiet reply. “I must let you do
the best you can for yourself.”

They went into the house and the next day Mr. Hazard was whirling
northward, gazing out of the car window and hoping that some good
chance would bring his boy back to him. As it was he felt lost and
quite alone.




CHAPTER II

U. S. R. S.


The long trip across the continent proved to be no hardship for Bob.
It was the first time he had ever gone alone on so long a journey and
he could not help but feel a certain sense of liberty. He made friends
with everybody on the train and many tired travelers saw the scenery
through his enthusiastic eyes, finding beauty in what ordinarily would
have seemed to them commonplace.

One thing only served to disturb his perfect enjoyment: This was a
conviction not to be denied, that his father was hurt by his action.
As he thought over their talks he knew that underneath the approval
his father had given, lay a deep disappointment. That Bob would not be
a lawyer was a hard blow; the knowledge that his son’s choice of an
occupation in life would mean almost constant separation, must hurt
the elder Hazard, who thought the world of his only son.

Bob realized these things keenly and they were painful to him, yet he
could not bring himself to give up his plan to be an engineer.

“Dad made his own way, tackled the job he wanted and made good. I’ve
_got_ to do the same. Probably _his_ father wanted him to do something
quite different. I’ll ask him about that some time. Besides, if I just
took up Dad’s business, it wouldn’t seem right somehow.”

But thoughts such as these occurred to him less and less as the
distance between him and the East grew greater. By the time he dropped
off the train at Williams, Arizona, where he changed to the day coach
that would take him to the Grand Canyon, his mind was so full of the
future that there was no room for the things he had left behind him.

When the jolting train stopped at the last station, the boy stepped off
almost at Whiskers’ side. Dropping his suit case, he caught the hand
that was stretched out to him and was happy when he saw the man’s grin
of welcome.

“Good work, Bob, my boy! It’s great to see you! Have a good trip?
You’ve grown since I saw you--how’re the other fellows? How’s Big
Chris?”

“Fine! Fine!” answered Bob. “And it’s good to see you too. I’m awfully
glad you’ve got a place for me. Is the job here at the Canyon?”

Steve Whitney shook his head. “No--but I’ll tell you all about it as we
go to the hotel. Grab your satchel and come along.”

“Right you are, Whisk--I mean, Mr. Whitney,” Bob answered in some
confusion. “I suppose you’ll have to be _Mister_ Whitney now since you
are the Big Boss. Last summer you were the fellow who was so good to us
kids and we took liberties.”

“You are right, Bob. I am the chief and starting from to-day I will
have to be Mr. Whitney. There is another rodman here and it would be
bad for discipline if you called me by that--‘vacation’ name, let’s
call it. But we had mighty good times when I was just Whiskers, didn’t
we?”

“You bet,” answered Bob. “I’ll never forget ’em.” For a moment he said
nothing, letting his thoughts drift. Then--“But where _is_ the job? You
said it wasn’t here.”

“No, just now there isn’t any job at all--”

“What?” exploded the boy, anxiously.

“Don’t worry,” the engineer assured him; “there will be plenty of work.
I have just finished a project in Colorado and am waiting for further
orders. I told you to meet me here because I wanted you to see the
greatest natural wonder we have in the United States, the Grand Canyon,
and I am going to work you so hard later on that you won’t have another
chance to get here before you go back to college. And I want your first
sight of it to be at sunset. Then it is most wonderful.”

By this time they had reached the hotel.

“Go and wash up and come down quickly,” urged Bob’s new boss. “It’s
almost sunset, and I don’t want you to miss it! I’ll wait for you here
on the porch.”

Bob wasted no time and a few minutes later joined Mr. Whitney. The
veranda of the hotel is built almost on the edge of the great rift
in the surface of the earth. Bob started to pull up a chair to the
railing where his friend was sitting but stopped as the other rose.

“I’ve got a better place than this to see it from,” said Mr. Whitney.
“A lot of folks will be coming out here presently and too many people
spoil the thing. Come along.”

Bob followed and was led to a little clump of bushes that grew on the
edge some distance from the hotel. Mr. Whitney pushed them aside and
disclosed a little ledge a few feet down from the rim, which afforded a
comfortable seat.

“Some class, eh, Bob?” laughed Whiskers as they settled themselves. “I
found it and try to get here every night. But let’s stop talking; it’s
about to begin.”

There was no need to talk; in fact, the glorious beauty of the panorama
spread before him would have made it almost impossible to talk even if
Bob had wanted to.

As far as the eye could reach, the great chasm extended. In it rose
pinnacles, spires and mountain ranges, alternating with deep valleys
and gulches. At the very bottom wound a tiny thread of silver, the
Colorado River, for whose passage nature had undertaken such a
gigantic task and, in its accomplishment, had created such beauty.

Bob’s first feeling was of his own littleness, his unimportance in
the face of such magnitude. But this went away as the sun, dropping
steadily to the opposite horizon, began to paint the scenes with magic
colors.

It was as if the sun were an artist, who, not satisfied with his
efforts, changed and changed again the colors on his canvas, for each
moment the tints and hues would fade or grow more intense as the
shadows grew deeper, and the scene would seem quite different.

When at last the sun dropped below the edge of the distant hills,
leaving the Canyon in deep purple shadow, Bob turned to Mr. Whitney.

“That is all I can stand now,” he said. “It is too wonderful.”

He walked back to the hotel, too overcome by the beauty of the thing he
had seen to attempt talking of it. Evidently Steve Whitney knew how the
boy felt, for he did not break the silence. But once inside the house
Bob realized that it had been a long time since luncheon.

“When’s supper, Boss Whitney? I’m hungry enough to eat tacks!”

The man laughed. “Even the Grand Canyon can’t keep a good, healthy
appetite down for long, can it? I guess supper is pretty nearly ready
now. But wait a minute--here is someone I want you to know.”

Bob looked up to see a young fellow of about his own age coming towards
them. He was rather tall and dark and dressed in khaki, and wore canvas
leggins. It was the costume of a regular civil engineer, thought the
boy from the East.

“This is Jerry King, Bob,” said Whitney. “Another member of my corps.
Shake hands with Bob Hazard, Jerry. We will all be together this
summer.”

The newcomer put out his hand and Bob grasped it warmly. He was
prepared to like anybody and anything in this new life he had begun.
After a few words they moved off in the direction of the dining room.

“What have you been up to this afternoon, Jerry?” asked the Chief, when
they had found their table.

“Nothing much,” was the answer. “Fooling ’round the Canyon a little.”

“You go down into it, then?” asked Bob.

“Yes, there’s a trail but there’s nothing much down there anyway.” This
from Jerry in an unenthusiastic tone.

The talk went on mostly about the Canyon. Bob noticed, however, that
Jerry King took very little part in the conversation. He didn’t seem
exactly unwilling to talk, but his remarks were few and far between.
And when they came they were short and matter of fact. Mr. Whitney
appeared not to notice this much. It was rather as if he was used to
Jerry’s manner. But Bob, however, felt that he was going to have a hard
job in thawing out this chap who was to be his companion through the
summer. He wanted to make friends but Jerry seemed to repulse every
advance he made.

When supper was over the party went out on the porch of the hotel. The
Chief lit his pipe and settled into a big rocking chair. “Well, Bob,”
he said, “now that you are here, are you glad that you came?”

“You bet I am,” was the enthusiastic answer.

“But he hasn’t seen any work yet,” put in Jerry shortly.

“I’m not worried about that,” Bob said confidently. “I think I’ll like
that too.”

“It’s not all a cinch,” said Whiskers. “The Reclamation Service is a
hard taskmaster. Jerry knows. He has been with me almost a year--ever
since I came back from Virginia.”

There was silence for a moment and then Bob asked quietly.

“Please, Mr. Whitney, won’t you tell me something about the Reclamation
Service? Although I have read what I could, I know very little about
the real spirit of it, only just figures showing what it’s done or is
going to do.”

“All right, Bob, I will, but you’ll have to stop me if I begin to bore
you. The Service is an enthusiasm of mine, you know.”

“I guess you know very well I won’t be bored. Go ahead.”

Steve Whitney filled his pipe and then began a description of what is
perhaps the most important thing the Government has ever done for the
West.

“About twelve years ago,” he said when his pipe was well lighted,
“after a great deal of agitation over it, Congress passed a bill
which created the thing we call the Reclamation Service. Its object
was to increase the number of farms and to increase the total area of
productive land. As you no doubt know, almost all the desert land in
the United States would be extremely productive provided it could get a
sufficient supply of one thing.”

“Water?” put in Bob.

“Yes, just that. In other parts of the country this water is provided
by rainfall. But deserts are deserts only because the rainfall is
slight, if there is any at all. Therefore it is necessary to build dams
in the country where there is rainfall, collect the water, and send it
down to the desert lands where it is needed.”

“Is that what the Service does?”

“Yes, that is our biggest job. We call it irrigation. But it isn’t
always necessary to build these dams where the rainfall is heavy. If
we can dam a river above the point where it begins to dry up, we can
usually collect enough water during the flood season to supply a great
area of dry land below it during all the months of the year.”

“And has the plan been a success?” interrupted Bob again.

“Decidedly. During 1913 the value of the crops produced on the lands we
have already irrigated was nearly sixteen million dollars. If all the
land had been worked which we are now able to irrigate, we would have
had nearly a million and a half acres of productive land which before
was only plains of alkali dust. The projects already planned and not
yet completed, or in some cases not even started, will more than double
the results I have just told you about. It is a great work.”

“But does the Government pay for all this?” asked Bob.

“At first it does, but the plan is that farmers who use irrigated lands
must pay a water tax which will eventually repay the Government the
amount of money it has invested. On some projects the farmers have
entirely repaid the Government. On others it will be years before the
money is finally returned.”

Bob drew a long breath. “This is work really worth while doing,” he
said, his eyes shining. “It must be great to know that each new dam you
complete will make thousands of acres of land green and productive. I
will be glad to help.”

“That’s the spirit,” said Whiskers. “As I said before, it is good work.
The reward is not all in the pay you get. It is in the achievement and
the service that you render. That is all that you can look forward to
in the way of payment. But I have talked too long. You must be tired
after your long trip. You’d better chase off to bed.”

But Bob would not go. He kept asking Mr. Whitney questions about the
details of the work and the man had to answer. He saw in the boy’s
enthusiasm something of the enthusiasm he himself had felt when he
had joined the Service, and which he had never lost, in spite of
the disappointments and hard knocks that had come his way. Finally,
however, he insisted on breaking up the conversation. But before Bob
left he said to him quite earnestly and seriously, “I have told you
about the Service, Bob, and I want you to think pretty carefully about
it. If you once start, you will have a hard time breaking away. There
are a lot of other things you can do which will bring you more money
and more fame. This working for the Government, the extending of the
territory of the country and increasing its value, gets into your blood
and once it does you will never be fit for anything else. It is not too
late to stop now if you want to. Good night, and let me know in the
morning what you decide to do.”




CHAPTER III

WHEN THE CHIEF WAS AWAY


Bob was asleep almost as soon as he touched the pillow. The long trip
on the train had tired him more than he had thought and he did not wake
until a heavy pounding on the door broke into his slumbers. Jerry King
came in when he at last answered.

“The Chief sent me up to wake you. Breakfast is almost over.”

Bob shook the sleep out of his eyes and hustled into his clothes. When
he came downstairs with Jerry he found that Mr. Whitney had already
finished his breakfast and had gone out. So he and Jerry had theirs.
During the meal Bob tried again to draw his new comrade out, but the
same unwillingness to talk possessed Jerry. Bob rather wondered what
was the matter. He had not been used to meeting with such reserve. He
remembered also that during the conversation on the porch the night
before Jerry had spoken hardly a word but sat in his chair motionless.
At last, giving it up as a bad job, he finished his meal in silence.
Steve Whitney met them in the lobby.

“Well, fellows,” he greeted them, “my orders have come, or at least I
think they will be my marching orders. A telegram has just been given
me. I’ve got to go to El Paso and meet the Division Superintendent. It
probably means my little vacation is over.”

“I’ll be glad to get to work,” said Jerry shortly.

“I don’t think you will have to wait much longer,” said Whitney
laughing. Then he turned to Bob. “Made up your mind yet? You can go
along with me if you’re going back East--”

“Not so’s you could notice it!” exclaimed Bob indignantly. “I’ve made
up my mind but it’s to stay right here!”

“Oh, if that’s the way you feel about it,” laughed Mr. Whitney, “all
right. Bob, I’m afraid the Service has got you. Now as to the future.
I probably won’t come back up here so I’ll telegraph you where to meet
me as soon as I know where we’ve been assigned. It’ll only be a few
days now, I reckon. My train’s going in a few minutes, so I’ll have to
hustle and pack. I’ll see you at the train.”

Bob got up early in order to see the Canyon at sunrise the morning
after Steve Whitney went away, but found that in comparison to the
sunset it was tame. Yet so inspiring was it that he was glad he had
taken the trouble. The panorama spread before his eyes was one of which
no other country could boast. Bob had seen pictures of it, had read
about it, and had been taught about it from his geography, but nothing
that he had read or heard or learned had given him even a faint idea of
the glory of the thing as it actually was, no matter what time of the
day it was seen.

After drinking his fill of the wonder he went back to the hotel to
breakfast and found Jerry King already at the table. The other boy
continued to puzzle him. Jerry made no effort to begin a conversation
and Bob refused to lay himself open to a turn-down by making the first
remark. However, as he rose from the table he asked if Jerry had been
down the Bright Angel Trail to the very bottom of the Canyon.

Jerry answered shortly, “Yes.”

“Go with me this morning?” asked Bob as shortly.

This time the answer was no--once was enough. So Bob, determined to get
as much fun as possible out of his enforced stay at the Canyon, started
out alone and joined the group of tourists in front of the hotel. They
were already preparing to make the descent. He decided to walk rather
than trust to one of the funny fat little mules which were provided
for the visitors who were too stout or too lazy to use the means of
locomotion given them by nature.

At last the start was made and after a walk of about a quarter of a
mile along the rim the party came to the head of the Bright Angel Trail
which led to the bottom. At first the going was fairly easy, but soon
the trail grew steeper and steeper and Bob was amazed to see the calm
way in which the little donkeys kept their footing, particularly when
they were carrying large and heavy human beings. Owing to the immense
zigzags that the trail had to take in order to provide a safe path, a
lot of ground had to be covered. Therefore it was not until almost noon
that the party reached the first plateau. This “plateau” is in reality
far from flat. It is merely a slight leveling out of the general
declivity about two-thirds of the way down.

Along with the most determined of the tourists, Bob made the final
descent to the bank of the river. It had been hot enough up at the
hotel. On the plateau it was fairly sizzling, but once at the bottom
the heat was intense. This probably accounted for the fact that the
whole party was quite ready to begin the return trip as soon as the
tourists got back their breath.

At the very depth of the Canyon Bob suddenly realized what the
Reclamation Service had to contend with. It was places like this which
needed feats of engineering skill to let people even get near to them,
that the Service had to contend with. Nature was the Service’s foe. Its
task was to subjugate her to its own ends. Of course this Canyon was
too big; the desert land was too far away for any irrigation project to
be thought of.

But it was in similar canyons, smaller, perhaps, that the Service built
its dams. Down the sides of cliffs like these, which even the mountain
goats had difficulty in mastering, the Service had to build its roads.
It was to such desolate beauty that the Service brought progress and
the service of mankind. In his imagination Bob saw the smooth face of
an enormous dam filling even this great canyon,--generating enough
horse power to run all the factories of the West, and collecting
enough water to irrigate all the homes that could be made on the great
American desert. Right then nothing was too stupendous a task for final
achievement. His whole being thrilled with the thought that he was to
be a part of the Service, that he was to have a hand in the great work
that it was doing and would do.

His mind busy with these thoughts, he found that the long climb to the
top did not bother him. After a wash-up he had supper and went out on
the hotel piazza. The sun had gone but its last banners of light were
flung up against the sky behind the farthest horizon. The depths of the
Canyon were black. Out of this rose myriad pinnacles, dim in outline,
rich in deep colors. Just at the opposite rim a strip of color spun
along, tipping the horizon with a golden glow.

“Wasn’t much after all your trouble to get down, was it?” said a voice
behind him. Bob looked up to find that Jerry had appeared.

“It was worth the trouble anyway,” answered Bob as Jerry settled into
a chair. He realized that Jerry’s remark was in reference to his trip
down the Canyon. “I’m mighty glad I went. I wouldn’t have missed it for
anything.”

“Well, I wouldn’t go again for a pretty,” returned Jerry. “Once is
a great plenty. Besides, there isn’t any chance of our ever doing
anything with this place. Anything useful, that is. I don’t know what
the Chief wanted to bring us up here for. Wish we were on the job. Hate
this loafing.”

“I wish we were too,” agreed Bob, warming up to Jerry’s unexpected long
speech. “Isn’t there anything exciting we can do while waiting for Mr.
Whitney?”

“Not a thing if we’ve got to stay here,” said the other and relapsed
into silence.

After a long period Jerry spoke again almost to himself. “If we were
only up Green River way, now, there would be a chance. I was by there
once. There’s a canyon there we might do something with--”

“Do you mean there’s a chance for a dam?” asked Bob.

“Yes,” said the other. “But it would mean tunneling through a mountain
to get the water out after the dam was built. That is nothing for the
Service if only we could get a road down into the canyon. Need it to
get machinery and materials down to the dam site. Nobody’s ever gone
through the canyon alive, so no one knows whether a road is practical
or not. Lots have started. I’ve sort of a hankering to try it.”

“What is it called?”

“The Labyrinth. It is only about sixty miles long. But in those sixty
miles there are more rapids, and bad ones, than there are in all of
the Grand Canyon. Well, I reckon there isn’t much chance of my ever
tackling it.”

“Why not?” asked Bob.

But evidently Jerry had used up all the words he had on tap. After some
sort of unsatisfactory answer he got up and moved off in silence in
the aloof way he had. Bob sat still and thought over what the other had
just told him. The plan of exploring this canyon which no one else had
ever been able to go through fired his imagination. He wanted to try it.

His reverie was broken into a few moments later by a bell boy coming
out with a telegram. It was from Mr. Whitney, and sent from El Paso.
Bob opened it and read: “Unexpected developments. Must go Washington.
Back within three weeks. Will wire further instructions.”

For a moment or two after he had read the message all Bob could think
of was that there was a long procession of boring days to be met. It
would have been a lot easier if Jerry King had been more of a chum and
less of a grouch. But orders were orders and it was up to him to obey.
He stuck the telegram in his pocket and set off to find Jerry, if that
was possible. Jerry had a way of disappearing, only to show up at meal
times.

He had not gone but a few steps before a great idea come to him. Why
couldn’t they try the Labyrinth Canyon stunt in the three weeks the
Chief would be away? This idea lent him speed in his search for his
companion. At last he found Jerry sitting in a tall chair watching some
tourists play pool. He went over to the other boy and said, “Come on
along outside for a minute, Jerry. I’ve got something to tell you.”

Once again on the piazza Jerry said, “What is it?”

Bob held forth the telegram. The other read it and said questioningly,
“Well?”

“Don’t you see?” said Bob eagerly.

“Don’t I see what?”

“We can tackle the Labyrinth if it isn’t too far away.”

“You’re crazy. That would take money. Besides it’s too risky for a
tenderfoot.”

But Bob was too much in earnest to take the last remark seriously. He
laughed. “Oh, I’m a tenderfoot all right but I know something about
paddling a canoe. Had a lot of it last summer and I can swim. And if it
is not too expensive, I’ve got the money. Any other objections?”

He pulled out a draft his father had given him before he had left for
the West. His father had said it was for emergencies and had drawn it
for a respectable sum. Jerry looked at the figures and whistled. “Oh, I
guess you’ve got the money all right. It’d be enough to put the thing
through. But it’s too risky.”

This was too much for Bob. He flared up. “I don’t see that _you’re_
taking me. If I want to go, I can go. You said you wanted to try it.
Now you’re the one who’s backing out when the chance to try it comes
along. I think it’s you who has the tender and _cold_ feet.”

“Cut it out, kid,” said Jerry. Evidently Bob’s tone of determination
had impressed him. Also the taunt about cold feet stung him. “I just
wanted to make sure you wanted to go, that’s all. You’re taking a
chance of never going back East again.”

“That part is all right,” said Bob, now on his mettle. The way Jerry
had taken his suggestion had got his fighting blood up and he was now
determined to go through with the adventure at all costs. “How far is
it to the place we start?”

“About six hours on the train,” was the answer. “We ought to be able to
find a boat when we get there. If we’re going to do it at all we’ve got
to start in a hurry. Otherwise we won’t be back here when the Chief’s
telegram is due. That is,” he added, “if we live to get the Chief’s
telegram.”

“Oh, don’t be so pessimistic,” said Bob. “I bet we’ll come through
alive and kicking. Shall we start in the morning?”

“I’m game.” And with this Jerry turned on his heel and walked off. At
the door he flung back, “If we’re going on that train you’d better hit
the hay soon. You’ll need all the strength you’ve got.”




CHAPTER IV

THE LABYRINTH


Late in the afternoon of the next day the two boys dropped off the
train at a little station in the desert. There was no hotel among the
houses scattered along the track but they were lucky enough to find a
room over the general store in which to sleep.

As they had so little time in which to accomplish their plan every
minute was valuable, so, as soon as they had provided for the night,
they started out to find some sort of a boat to carry them on their
adventure.

The proprietor of the store, who was also their host, directed them to
a man he thought might have one. The latter, a rancher in a small way,
was rather dubious as to the boat’s being in a condition to navigate.
“It’s down by the river,” he said. “Been down there pretty nigh a year,
too, ef somebody hain’t swiped it. Take ye down to look at it in the
mornin’. Ef you’re aimin’ to commit suicide tryin’ to get through the
Labyrinth, it ought to be jest the thing for you. ’Twas built by a
party what aimed to try the stunt but got cold feet before they tackled
it. They give it to me, so ef you’re willin’ to pay about ten dollars,
you’re welcome to it.”

This sounded good to the boys and they went back to the store feeling
in luck. They had brought with them the air mattress which Jerry had
advised buying at the Canyon, as it would give them a dry bed no matter
where they might be forced to camp. They added to this before going to
bed by buying provisions from the storekeeper, endeavoring to get as
much food in as little bulk as possible. At last their preparations for
the trip were complete, and they went to bed anxious for the morning,
and hoping that the boat would prove what they wanted.

In order not to lose any time they packed the dunnage they expected to
take into two loads and carried it with them when they went down the
next morning to inspect the boat. It was a long way from the little
town to the river and their spirits sagged as the loads grew heavier.
However, they found the boat covered over by brushwood and some old
sail-cloth, and when its owner pulled it out into the open they were
much encouraged. The boat was about sixteen feet long, high at both
ends with water-tight compartments.

“If it only doesn’t leak,” said Jerry, “it will be all right.”

They pulled it into the water and watched with bated breath. It leaked
badly and Jerry was disgusted. Bob, however, knowing more about boats
than his companion, realized that the long time the boat had been out
of water had caused the strips to contract and in all probability a few
hours’ soaking would make them tight. Bob had insisted on putting the
boat into the water before paying for it and as the water came in more
slowly after a few minutes, he was satisfied. They paid the man and he
went off after wishing them a rather pessimistic farewell.

“I reckon I’ve seen as many as twenty danged fools try this stunt and
I’ve never heard of any of them comin’ out the other end--that is,
comin’ out breathin’. It’s a pity when the two of you air so young.
I’ll be right glad to hear from you ef you do get through, seein’ as
how it was my boat. Danged ef I figger I’ll hear, howsomever. Good-bye
to you.”

With this he started back up the trail, shaking his head. Jerry
suggested they make camp and wait until the boat was water-tight. This
seemed a good suggestion, so they built a fire and made some coffee. In
the afternoon Bob baled out the water that was in the boat and after
watching carefully for half an hour found that no more water had come
in.

“She’s all right,” he called to Jerry, who was building a lean-to for
the night.

“All right,” answered the other, “pull her up on the bank and we’ll
stow away everything that we don’t need for the night. We can leave
just as soon as it is light to-morrow. We wouldn’t get far enough along
to pay us for starting now.”

The boat easily carried all the things they had brought. Jerry took
particular care in stowing away a box which he had hung onto jealously
since they started. It was rather a mysterious looking case about
which he had volunteered no information. Up to this time Bob had not
questioned him, although he had wondered what was in it. However,
as Jerry reserved the safest and dryest part of the boat for it Bob
ventured to ask what it was.

“Light transit,” said Jerry. “We will need it to make sure that a road
into the canyon is possible. What might seem quite possible to the eye,
is often no use at all. I thought we’d better make sure.”

Bob was interested. He had read of and knew in a general way what use
engineers made of transits and levels but up to this time he had not
had an opportunity to see them in actual service.

“If we’ve got to use it, Jerry,” he suggested, “don’t you think you had
better tell me something about it now while we’ve got a chance? Then
I’ll be of more use when we get down to the canyon.”

“All right,” said Jerry rather ungraciously. “But you’ll soon catch on
to it when we start work. You’ll have to.”

At the same time he took the case out of the boat and opened it. It
was a beautiful little instrument, weighing hardly twenty-five pounds.
It stood on telescopic legs of steel. Jerry showed Bob how to set it
up and to manipulate the four screws by which it was made level. Then
he showed him how to focus the telescope and all the other elementary
things. After a little practice Bob felt competent to give Jerry what
help he would need.

“Gee whiz, it’s interesting,” said Bob at last, when Jerry put the
fascinating instrument away.

“After you’ve carried one for about five years you won’t think it so
interesting,” returned Jerry, suddenly remembering that he was a grouch.

The night came down cold. The boys were glad to bundle up into their
sleeping bags and get what rest they could. The novelty and excitement
could keep Bob awake for only a little while, for the danger into which
he was headed did not worry him for a moment, and he was very tired. He
wanted adventure and he was going to have it. Only one thing deterred
him at all, and that was the thought of his father. But before he had
left the hotel at the Grand Canyon he had written a letter explaining
to the older Hazard what he was planning to do. He had, of course,
minimized the danger. But, even so, when Mr. Hazard got the letter he
was very much upset and had an impulse to get on the next train and
bring his boy back to civilization, if he still had a boy to bring back.

Jerry was first awake in the morning. He roused Bob but not until he
had a fire going and the coffee-pot singing merrily. Bob got up and,
slipping off his clothes, dived into the river. The water was cold but
not unpleasantly so. Jerry looked at him for a minute and laughed as he
came out dripping.

“You won’t need to _take_ a bath after this. If you don’t have about
five unexpected ones during the day I miss my guess.”

Bob laughed. “Well, water won’t hurt us. You’re sort of a grouch,
aren’t you, Jerry?” he said pleasantly. It was a tactless thing to say,
for the other boy shut up like a clam and except as it was absolutely
necessary he gave no openings for further conversation.

“Jolly sort of trip I’m going to have,” thought Bob, “if Jerry is
going to keep up this sort of thing. I ought never to have said he was
a grouch, though.”

After breakfast they rolled up their mattress and stowed away in the
boat the things they had used during the night. At last they were ready
to start.

“We might as well be going,” said Jerry. “Hop in.” He was already at
the oars, which he had tied securely to the oarlocks. The wisdom of
this precaution was later to be proved to them. Once Bob was in, Jerry
pulled off. He was a fair oarsman and going with the current the boat
made good time. At this point the river was broad and, except for
the towering hills which rose in the distance, it might have been a
peaceful tributary stream of any civilized river. Its calm surface gave
no warning of what was to come in the way of rapids and whirlpools.
After a bit Bob took the oars and as he had had more experience with
boats he made even better time than Jerry had. Turn by turn they went
through the morning.

It was not long before the rolling hills on either side of the stream
gave way to rocky cliffs and deep gulches through which little creeks
trickled into the river. The current grew faster and here and there
an ugly rock showed its head above the surface, the water rushing by
angrily on either side.

“Getting a little interesting,” ventured Bob.

“This isn’t anything,” growled Jerry, and then they went on again in
silence.

About noon they pulled in to a rocky ledge and had some lunch, and
after a short rest went on again. Towards the middle of the afternoon,
as they were turning a bend in the river, Bob, sitting in the stern,
saw what seemed to him to be a mountain cut in half.

“That must be it,” he said. “Look, Jerry!”

Jerry turned. “You’re right, I guess. It’s the Labyrinth.”

“We ought to get there by night. It’s only around the next bend,” Bob
ventured.

Jerry looked around again and laughed shortly. “We’ll be lucky if we’re
there by to-morrow night. That cliff is twenty miles away at least.”

Bob was amazed. It looked to be only about a mile away. Jerry must be
mistaken. But Jerry was right. Although they had covered a great deal
of distance, when it came time to camp for the night the cleft in the
mountain seemed as far away as when Bob had first sighted it. Two days
later, however, they did reach it. And it was not until the river had
swirled them through this giant gateway that they encountered any rapid
water. They began to think that the passage of the Labyrinth had been
overestimated.

In the late afternoon of the second day, after they had slipped
silently by the towering walls of the canyon which here came down
sharply into the river, and had swung around a bend, Jerry sighted the
first rough going.

“Pull in to shore, Bob,” he said quickly. “We’d better take a look at
what’s coming before we tackle it.”

Once ashore they made their way as near to the rapids as possible. The
water boiled in fury as it rushed by the rocks that opposed its way.

“Gee whiz!” ejaculated Bob. “This is worse than anything I’ve tackled
before--ever!”

Jerry laughed and said, “There’ll be a lot worse than this before
we’re through, I’m afraid. This isn’t much. We’ll be able to shoot it
all right.”

Back in the boat Jerry took the oars, and, helped by the current,
drifted swiftly towards the first rapids of the shallow and dangerous
passage. Once into the white water they found the going easier than
they had expected. After a struggle and a narrow escape or two from
shipwreck on jagged rocks they saw smoother water ahead. But this
held a new danger. Here the river made a short bend, and the current,
throwing itself against the opposite bank, threatened to dash them
against it before they could control their boat.

It was a ticklish moment. They shot out of the white spray and were
headed for the rocky wall. “Quick, Jerry!” yelled Bob. “Pull her
’round.”

Jerry used both his arms on the right hand oar and a moment later,
breathless and a little exhausted, they came to quieter water.

“Like shooting the chutes, isn’t it?” said Bob, putting his feeling
into words as soon as he could speak. “Great sport!”

Jerry, however, bent to his oars, betraying his emotion only by the
gleam of his eyes. No more rapids of any consequence hindered their way
the remainder of the afternoon. It was not until well along the next
morning that they came again to anything which really could be called
dangerous.

The first intimation the boys had of the approaching rapids was the
increasing speed of the boat. As they looked ahead the water seemed
clear and unbroken, but some current stronger than usual was hurrying
them along.

“We’re in for it again,” yelled Jerry to Bob, who was rowing. “Back
water--hard!”

Bob dug in the blades of his oars with all the force he could muster.
The boat lost a little headway but the effort came too late. The
current had them in its grasp. A quick rush in the blinding spray and
the boys found themselves in the icy water. Bob, however, had kept hold
of one of the oars of the overturned boat and he thanked his stars that
Jerry had had the foresight to tie it to the oarlock.

As soon as he shook the water out of his eyes a glance showed him what
had happened. Some freak of nature had left a ledge in the bottom of
the river over which the water flowed, making a waterfall of perhaps
six or eight feet. So even was the edge of the fall that it had not
been visible to them as they came down stream through the first rough
water.

“All right?” called Bob to Jerry, who had been carried past him by the
foam-flecked water.

“Sure,” the other sputtered. “Just keep drifting and we’ll land on that
point down there. I’ll stand by to help beach the boat when you get
there.”

The boys pulled the boat up on the rocky ledge that Jerry had called
a point, where they discovered to their great relief that no great
damage had been done. The water-tight compartments had held and their
provisions and clothing were quite dry. A few minutes later they were
off again, but paddling a little more cautiously this time, for they
had experienced the first trick the Labyrinth could play. They would be
better prepared for the next.

A stretch of good going gave them time for a little reflection. Bob
busied himself with thoughts of a possible dam site. It seemed queer
to him that Jerry had appeared to take no interest in the canyon for
this purpose.

“Why haven’t we looked for a place for the dam?” Bob ventured at last.
“We’ve passed a lot of places where the canyon walls were narrow.”

“No hurry,” answered Jerry. “It’d be too far to tunnel a canal through
the mountain right here. The valley we want to irrigate is miles
farther down. There’s no use bothering our heads about it until we get
nearer.”

Satisfied, Bob let the matter rest. So far the journey, with the
exception of the one upset, had proved rather tame going and both boys
were a little surprised that former explorers had found it impossible
to make the passage. The boy from the East rather doubted that they
would meet any worse obstacles than they had already. But Jerry was
more skeptical. When Bob ventured that he thought the trip was a cinch,
Jerry agreed, with a reservation.

“It’s been a cinch so far, but just wait. We’ve not started to get into
trouble yet. We’ll get ours all right before we’re through.”

Hardly were the words out of his mouth when more trouble ensued. The
canyon broadened and instead of the river being confined in a deep,
fast-flowing current, it was spread out into a shallow, dawdling
stream. Several times they grounded, there was so little water covering
the sand. Here and there rocks stuck above the water, and in places it
was necessary to jump out and push the boat into a deeper part.

“It seems to me we’re going to get that trouble right now,” said Bob.
“As soon as this narrows a little bit, if it doesn’t get deeper I bet
we’ll have rapids with a vengeance.”

This turned out to be the case, for the water went faster as they
proceeded, and instead of the sandy bottom, rocks became more and
more numerous, the water rushing by them with angry murmurs. Bob had
difficulty in keeping the craft from mishap. After narrowly escaping
shipwreck between two particularly vicious looking jagged stones he
decided that there was no safety in going on the way they had. Suddenly
he had an idea.

“The next time we get to a shallow spot, Jerry,” he ordered between
strokes, “take hold of the painter and jump out. We must bring the bow
up stream.”

Jerry saw that Bob must have some good reason for the maneuver and
without a word took hold of the rope which was fastened to the bow
of the light craft and slipped overboard at the first likely spot.
Pressing himself against a rock, he held taut and let the action of the
current, helped by Bob’s pulling strongly on one oar, turn the boat’s
nose in the direction from which they had come. It was ticklish work
in view of the position in which they were placed. But once around he
saw what Bob had in mind when he had planned the stunt, for as soon as
he was aboard again Bob began rowing against the current. This allowed
the boat to go very slowly down stream. In this way he had much more
control than merely backing water could give him. Besides he could see
for himself what was coming, as in a rowing position he naturally faced
the stern.

“A good idea,” commented Jerry as Bob, due to the new method of
progress, missed hitting a wicked rock.

This word of commendation from his comrade pleased Bob immensely.
It was the first word of approval he had had from his gloomy chum.
“Easier, that’s all!” he answered. But both boys were glad when a new
stretch of still water was reached.

Just before sundown next day they came to an obstacle which at first
sight rather daunted them. As they rounded a bend, the most surprising
bit of scenery they had so far encountered flashed before their eyes.
The canyon seemed to stop, to have no outlet. It was as if they had
come into an amphitheater from which there was no escape. Even the way
they had come in was not visible. The point of rocks which had made the
bend in the river merged into the sides of the canyon in such a way as
to make it seem that there was no opening at all.

“Golly!” almost whispered Bob, awed by the strangeness of the scene. “I
reckon this is why no one came through. There doesn’t seem to be any
way to get out--”

“There’s got to be a way through,” growled Jerry. “Where does the water
go? Must go somewhere; can’t stop here, that’s sure as rain.”

“P’r’aps--p’r’aps it goes through a cave,” suggested Bob. “I’ve read
about underground rivers, haven’t you?”

“Oh, shucks,” said Jerry. “Probably the way out is hidden just like the
way we’ve come. Look back. You can’t see how we got in here, can you?”

Bob had to admit this was so. “Maybe you’re right. Anyhow, it’s so dark
we can’t tell for certain. I think we’d better get ashore somewheres
and make camp. We’ll find out about it in the morning.”

When they awoke the next morning the rounded chamber of the canyon was
flooded with light.

“Find your ridge,” invited Bob politely, “the one behind which our
river flows on and on and--”

“Oh, shut up!” was Jerry’s ungrateful retort. Since he had opened his
eyes he had endeavored to find just that thing--with no success. But he
would not own up until he had had another long look. But after a while
he had to give in.

“Looks like you were right,” he said tersely. “The river must go
through a tunnel, because it sure comes out on t’other side. This
river is part of what goes through the Grand Canyon.”

Bob had the good sense not to gloat openly over Jerry’s discomfiture.

“All right,” was all he said. “But let’s find the mouth of the tunnel.
Hustle up with the grub.”

They gulped their coffee and soon cast off, letting the stream carry
them gently towards the face of the great obstruction. A few minutes
later they saw the solution of this mystery. Under the cliff the river
flowed swiftly and silently into a dark hole.

“Back water,” said Bob. “We’d better explore a little before we start
through.”

“You don’t mean to go through it, do you?” said Jerry, startled out of
his usual calm manner by the way in which the other boy had spoken.

“Why not?” returned the other. “It looks like the only way we can go,
doesn’t it?”

“Yes,” said Jerry, “but--I didn’t figure on anything like this.”

“We can’t go back again, can we?” asked Bob. “There doesn’t seem to be
anything else to do but to try the tunnel.”

His first surprise over, Jerry saw that Bob was right. If they didn’t
go through the tunnel they would probably never go anywhere. It would
be more than their strength could accomplish to force the boat back
through the rapids they had encountered. And even if they could reach
the top of the cliffs, Jerry knew that they would die of thirst before
they could make their way to civilization.

“You’re right, I guess,” he assented. “We’ve got to do it. Come on, we
might as well get it over.”

But Bob, who was at the oars, pulled towards the bank. “Just a jiffy,
Jerry, I’ve got a hunch. Why couldn’t a dam be built here?”

In a flash Jerry saw what Bob meant, and for a second was ashamed that
in the excitement he had forgotten the real object of their expedition.
They were out to find a place where a dam might be built that would
bring the water of life to the parched desert on the other side of
the mountain--and he had forgotten all this when his personal safety
was in danger. He looked up at the wall nature had built across the
canyon. This time it was not as an obstruction that he saw it but as
a possible location for a dam. When the boat touched the shore, he
brought out the transit and set it up. Bob waited breathlessly for his
decision. At last Jerry took his eye from the telescope.

“Yes,” he said slowly, “it looks possible to me. Better’n that, Bob, it
looks mighty lucky. Nature has given us a big help if it turns out that
it _is_ possible.”

“You think my hunch may be right then?” put in Bob, his eyes shining.
“P’r’aps this big wall might become part of the dam itself!”

“Yep! Here, take a squint through the telescope and see for yourself.
The top of this wall is more’n halfway to the top of the canyon.”

Bob applied his eye to the glass and confirmed his comrade’s statement.
“Can’t we take some measurements?” he wanted to know.

“Won’t be necessary. We couldn’t climb to the top anyway--”

“Then the transit’s no use?”

“Except as a telescope. But at that it’s told us a lot. But that was a
wonderful hunch of yours, Bob. I guess you must be a born engineer. To
put it through we’d have to stop up the mouth of the tunnel into which
the river runs. Then extra masonry work on top of the cliff would bring
it up to the necessary height.”

“I’ll bet a road could be made from the edge of the canyon to the top
of the cliff,” asserted Bob confidently, “and what work had to be done
here at the river bed could be managed by derricks and cranes from that
spot. Don’t you think so?”

“It’d be a big saving all right if it could,” exclaimed Jerry at last.
“And I believe it will work. There’s only one thing more to find out
and that is how long the tunnel is.”

“There’s only one way to find out, isn’t there?” said Bob. “That’s to
go through it. Are you ready?”

Jerry realized that they had wonderful news to bring back to the boss.
To find a location was good work, but to find a dam almost ready-made
would mean such a saving for the Reclamation Service that the stunt
would be almost unique. It fired his enthusiasm and stilled any fears
he might have of the danger to be overcome.

“Sure,” he said. “Let’s go to it. If we get through we’ll know what we
want to know. If we--we don’t, it doesn’t make much difference, does
it, old man?”

Impulsively Bob put out his hand. “We’ll win out, Jerry, and we’ll
be proud that _we_ did it. If something should happen--it’s for the
Service!”

They felt the spirit of pioneers and an immense loyalty to the Service
and what it stood for. Jerry shook his hand warmly.

A moment later the boys were afloat. As they got near to the dark
entrance they saw that the jagged rocks which fringed the arch came
very near to the water.

“We’ll have to feel our way through,” said Bob. “Lie low until we get
in and then try to catch hold of the roof. We don’t want to go through
too fast.”

“All right,” sang out Jerry. “But I wish we had a lantern.”

“Keep wishing,” laughed Bob. “That’s about all the good it’ll do you.”

The very real danger had shaken Jerry out of his aloofness. This is
very often the case in moments of real peril when even bitter enemies
are drawn together and become friends during the moments of danger.

“Duck!” yelled Jerry.

Hardly were the words out of his mouth before the boat and its
occupants were plunged into the gloom of the cavern.

“Don’t bother about the oars,” said Bob, his voice echoing from the
walls of the passage. “It’s too dark for ’em. Try to get a hold on the
roof.”

It was some moments before their combined efforts to clutch the rocky
roof of the tunnel succeeded sufficiently to bring their boat under
control.

“Better not let go one hand till you get another hold!” cautioned
Jerry. “It’s mighty slippery.”

Foot by foot they made their way through the tunnel of dread. Cold fear
clutched at the heart of each boy, for any moment disaster might come
in one of a hundred ways--and they couldn’t see it coming!

For a time all went well, but soon Jerry said in a whisper--somehow the
dark made him whisper rather than speak aloud--“I can’t touch the roof
any more, can you?”

“No, but it’s all right,” said Bob as cheerfully as he could. “We’ll
just have to trust to luck. Sit down and let her rip!”

They slid noiselessly through the impenetrable darkness with only the
murmur of the water to break the stillness. The very quietness added
a terror of its own. There was no way of telling how fast they were
going. They could not see the water and only the rush of cold air
against their faces told them they were moving at all.

“Wonder how much longer it’ll be,” whispered Bob, forcing a little
laugh. “Seems like we’ve gone miles!”

“I’ve got beyond wondering how far we’ve got to go,” said Jerry
fervently. “I just want something to happen. Anything at all would be
better than just sitting helpless.”

After this attempt at conversation each boy relapsed into his own
gloomy thoughts. These were suddenly disturbed, however, for Jerry
called out, a note of hope in his voice, “I think I see light ahead!”

Bob looked and saw it was so. A little speck of white appeared in the
distance. Rapidly it grew larger. Now the blackness turned to a gray
and in the new light the boys saw why it was they had come through
without rubbing against the side walls.

The tunnel was absolutely straight and could not have been carved more
evenly through the mountain by the machinery of man. So swift was the
current that the boat had had no choice but to go in a straight line,
and so wide was the tunnel that there was slim chance of interference
with its walls. The boys were so thankful that they were approaching
the end of the cavern and its darkness that neither thought of picking
up the oars which were still dangling idly alongside the boat. They sat
as if fascinated, watching the opening grow larger and larger.

Nearer it came to them until at last with a swoop they were out into
the daylight. Blinking in the bright light, their eyes unaccustomed to
the sun, they did not realize that a new danger threatened them. It was
a long moment before Bob saw what a predicament they were in.

“Look out for falls!” he shouted. Jerry turned and saw that they were
on the very brink of a precipice over which the river was flowing.
It was a nasty hole they were in. From the noise the water made when
it dropped, Jerry was sure it was a long way to the bottom. Besides,
he saw in a flash that along its edge gashes of rock stuck up like
sentinels. If they were driven against any one of these it would mean
instant shipwreck.

Simultaneously the boys reached for the oars but a sudden twist in the
current swung the light craft broadside to the stream and as it turned
the bow grazed a half submerged rock. The violent shock caused Jerry
to lose his balance. Before he could so much as move, Bob saw his chum
topple overboard, where the current swept him towards the brink.

Bob’s first impulse was to jump in after Jerry, but in a flash he
realized he could help him a lot more if he could save the boat and
pull him to shore. Grabbing the oars, he made a vain effort to stem
the boat’s headway by pulling against the stream. He was too late. The
current had the frail craft in its grip.

[Illustration: “Look out for falls!” Bob shouted.]

He thrashed the water with the oars, but, in spite of his frantic
efforts, the boat was whirled towards what end he could not guess. Just
at the brink a sudden cross rip caught the boat and flung it against
one of the rocks which the hurrying waters had not been able to wear
away. A sickening crash announced the end of the craft that had given
such good service. The same jar flung Bob out and a second later he was
hurtling through the foam-laden air over the edge of the fall.

Luckily for him, the impact which had thrown him out, served to propel
him a little to one side of the spot where the wrecked boat plunged
ahead of him, and to land him in a pool of deep water. If this had not
happened and he had crashed into the boat’s wreckage, broken bones
would have been his portion. As it was, he missed this fate by only a
hair’s breadth.

After having gone deep into the pool, Bob came to the surface, his
lungs bursting. One side of his body was numb from the impact of his
fall on the surface of the water. Aside from this, he was little the
worse for his experience.

He was far too dazed to try to swim. But the whirlpool below the
fall flung him aground and, instinctively, he scrambled up a rocky
shallow out of the water. He lay there, too stupified to move. Then the
realization came that for the moment he was safe. A second afterwards
he remembered that Jerry had gone over the fall too. Something must be
done and he was the only one to do it. Pulling himself together, he
crawled to his knees and looked out over the surging water below the
fall. He could see no signs of his chum. He groaned.

The fact that Jerry was gone whirled in his head. He must find out
where his comrade was. Looking down, he saw something which had escaped
his first look. It was a black object bobbing about in an eddy off the
main rush of the current. He could not be sure that it was Jerry. His
wracked bones told him it was only driftwood--that Jerry was gone--that
he could make no further effort. But his pride and determination told
him he must go on. It might be Jerry and if he did not make sure he
could never forgive himself.

Stumbling over the rocks, he started off as fast as he could manage.
Half blinded, he slipped off a rock and was plunged into the current.
Instinct made him swim and the current helping him, he approached
rapidly the place where he thought he had seen Jerry. Little by little
his forced exertions cleared his brain and his determination to go on
made him forget his pains.

As he swam nearer to the object which was swirling around in the water,
it constantly eluded his grasp, but he saw that it was Jerry. It was as
if the river was playing tag with him, snatching the thing he wanted
out of his reach. Reason told him that Jerry was dead. What was the
use of his trying to keep up this endeavor when it was all so useless?
But something kept him striving, held him to his aim. He couldn’t give
up. With a last despairing lunge, he shot into the eddy and caught his
comrade’s shoulder. With infinite pains he swam with his prize to the
bank. Safely there, he had only strength to pull it halfway out of the
water.

He was done, spent for the moment, but the will power which had driven
him on and on roused him. He had done this much, he must do the rest
even though every muscle in his body rebelled. He dragged the lifeless
form of his friend entirely out of the water and managed to lay him
face downward over a round rock, letting his head lie low. Then Bob
flung himself on Jerry and tried with the weight of his own body
to force the water out of the other’s lungs. Only a little success
rewarded this maneuver. Next Bob let the other’s limp body roll off
onto the ground and, sitting astride of it, worked his chum’s arms up
and down to induce breathing. There was no response.

Tears of utter exhaustion streamed down Bob’s face. But he kept on. Up
and down, up and down, he pulled the other’s arms. Just as he was about
to give in to the utter refusal of his body to go on, he thought he
heard a faint sigh from his comrade. This put new strength in his arms
and new ability to continue. He was not mistaken. After another moment
Jerry again heaved a long sigh and started breathing, jerkily at first,
yet breathing. When Bob was sure that there was no mistake, that Jerry
was again in the land of the living, he rolled to one side, absolutely
all in.

It was not long, however, before their strong constitutions asserted
themselves. Soon both boys were able to sit up and take stock of what
damage had been done. Jerry was first on his feet, pale and a little
shaky, but again master of himself.

“Was it a close shave?” he asked as Bob sat up.

“You bet,” was the heartfelt answer. “I thought you were a goner sure.
But where is the boat?”

Jerry scanned the river a moment before replying: “She’s not in sight.”

“Sunk, do you think?” anxiously queried Bob. “Seems to me I remember
hitting a rock just an instant before--before I did my parachute act.”

“I don’t know. Come on and let’s see if it has gone around the bend.
At that we’ll never be able to catch up with it unless it’s grounded
somewheres.”

Without the boat, they would have no provisions. The nature of the
country didn’t promise much in the way of forage, and even if they
succeeded in climbing the canyon walls, they would probably starve
before they reached civilization. It was a terrifying prospect and each
boy realized it fully. But neither would show to the other the fear
that gripped him. Stumbling and weak they made their way over the rocks
until they could see around the bend.

“Hurray!” called Bob, who was in the lead. “There she is.”

When Jerry came up he saw what had called forth his comrade’s shout.
The boat was lying wedged between two rocks on the opposite shore, one
end entirely submerged by the rushing stream.

“Can you make it?” asked Bob. “We’ll have to swim.”

“I guess so,” answered the other. “It’s got to be done.”

Without hesitating, Bob slipped into the water and struck out. The
current carried him far down the river from the point he was making
for, but he reached the other side in safety. Jerry followed and strove
manfully, but the accident had taken a good deal of his strength and he
was thankful when Bob waded out and gave him a hand to shore.

Their boat was a wreck, they found when they came up to it. The after
water-tight compartment was completely stove in. This had caused
the stern to sink. Two things, however, were in their favor. The
front compartment, in which they had stowed their blankets, extra
clothing, matches and the transit, was still intact. Also, as the after
compartment had held only their canned eatables, the ducking had not
hurt them. Few of the cans had fallen out.

“I reckon we’ll have to wait until morning to see what we can do about
fixing the boat,” said Bob. “It’s much too dark now. Come on, we’ll
light a fire and be as comfortable as we can. We’re sort of inland
Robinson Crusoe’s, aren’t we?”




CHAPTER V

JERRY’S STORY


The boys cooked some supper and made camp as best they could from the
salvaged cargo of their boat. Afterwards they slipped out of their wet
clothes and rolled up in the blankets before the comforting warmth of
their fire.

Bob was looking into the glowing coals, thinking over the events of the
day, which, since they had turned out safely, were now to be treasured
as great adventures. Jerry for his part was lying looking up at the
narrow strip of star-lit sky showing between the edges of the canyon’s
top. Suddenly he rolled over and put his hand on his companion’s
shoulder.

“You did me a good turn to-day,” he said a little huskily. “Thanks.
I--I can’t say things very well but I want to tell you--”

“Cut it out,” stammered Bob, confused. “I didn’t do anything.”

“Saved my life, I reckon, is all you did. It must have been some job,
too, although I don’t know how you did it.”

“You’d have done the same thing for me,” returned Bob, anxious to get
off the subject. “Let’s talk about the dam site.”

But Jerry was not to be put off. He had come very close to death and it
had shaken him out of his reserve. Bob had saved him and he wanted to
thank him, to show his gratitude.

“The old dam can wait. You did a mighty fine thing for me and I want to
know how you managed it.”

“I just pulled you out and pumped the water out of you and--and here
you are,” was Bob’s explanation of the episode.

“Seems to me it was a sort of angry whirlpool you pulled me from,”
retorted Jerry. But he saw that he would have a hard time in getting
any more details. “Anyhow, I know I’ve got to thank you for my
life--such as it is!”

The note of sadness in the latter part of Jerry’s remark struck sharply
on Bob’s ears. It flashed on him that there was possibly a reason for
his comrade’s fits of silence and grouchiness. This might very well be
mixed up with his former life. He made an effort to find out.

“What’s the matter with your life?” he asked quickly. “I’d want nothing
better. To be with the Reclamation Service and to have Mr. Whitney for
a boss seems pretty good to me!”

“That part’s all right. The Chief is bully, but--”

“But what?” encouraged Bob.

“Oh, it’s nothing I can talk about,” returned the other and buried his
face in his hands.

Bob watched him for a moment and then said softly, “But if you can talk
about it p’r’aps it _will_ help. Don’t you think so?”

“I don’t know,” hesitated the other after a pause. “I reckon it’s
mighty kiddish of me but--but I just can’t help it.”

Bob was wise enough to wait until Jerry felt like going on. He knew
that the other boy must be very much upset, quite shocked out of his
customary reserve by the happenings of the day, to say as much as he
had. His patience was at length rewarded.

“It’s--it’s just that I haven’t ever had a family like other fellows.
There isn’t a soul who’d care a bit whether I’d been drowned to-day or
not. If I get along, it’s all by myself. Somehow it doesn’t seem worth
while.”

“That’s mighty tough,” said Bob sympathetically, when Jerry paused for
a moment. “I’ll bet Mr. Whitney cares--”

“But that’s not like having someone you _belong_ to!” cried Jerry.
“The Boss is all right but he isn’t a family. Why, the first thing
I remember is selling papers in the Loop back in Chicago when I was
hardly big enough to walk, and getting licked when I got home because
I didn’t bring in enough pennies. Home!” the boy’s voice broke on the
word. “It wasn’t a home!”

“Surely your parents wouldn’t treat you like that!” expostulated Bob
Hazard, horrified.

“They weren’t my parents, no fear. They told that soon enough. I’d been
taken in by ’em ’cause they thought I might be useful--”

“Who were they?”

“Oh, a cabby driver and his wife. The old woman told me once she wished
she’d left me on the doorstep where she found me. But I stuck it out
with them, until I was about fourteen, I reckon, and then something
happened. One day a man spoke to me on State Street and asked if I
didn’t want to go out in the country. He made a wonderful picture of
the road on which there were no houses, the haystacks under which one
could sleep. I’d never been outside of the city and it sounded great to
me. He said I could go along with him and he would show me all these
wonders. It was springtime and the licking I’d had the night before
still smarted, so I went.”

Once Jerry had started his tale, it flowed on without interruption. He
seemed anxious to get it out.

“I didn’t know what I’d let myself in for. If anything, my life was a
lot worse than it’d been before. The Denver Kid was the name of the man
who had picked me up and I soon learned that he was a tramp--a hobo.
All first class hoboes get boys who go along with them and on whom fall
all the hard work. Their pay is in kicks and beatings. And I got my
share of both. I found the country to be as he said it was, but we saw
very little of it, for the Kid didn’t like walking. He stayed close to
the railroad and I saw most of the country from a crack in the door of
a box car, or through the flying sand thrown up over us as we clung to
a rattling brake-beam.

“It’s hard to escape from a gang of tramps once you’re in it. Not for
two years was I able to pull it off. Finally I got my chance to beat
it. Somehow, the sight of kids going to school had given me a hankering
for an education of some sort and I was ashamed that all I could do was
spell out the newspaper and read a time-table.”

“How did you manage it?” put in Bob, who was thrilled with the
narrative.

“One day the Kid sent me out to rustle a hand-out. We were in Iowa at
that time, just when they were bringing in the wheat harvest. I went up
to a farmhouse and started my spiel on a lady who came to the door. She
let me finish what I had to say, took me in and without a word gave me
a big spread. But when I got through she made up for her silence. She
began jawing at me just as a mother might.”

“I know,” put in Bob. “I didn’t have a mother either. At least, it was
so long ago I can hardly remember her.”

Jerry went on with his story. “She told me I ought to be ashamed of
myself, big, husky boy that I was, roaming around doing no useful work.
Wanted to know why I didn’t stay there and help with the harvest and
work for my living. This wasn’t the first time that I had been handed
out the same sort of chatter. But I fell for it this time--she was sort
of homely and nice. The only thing I was afraid of was the Denver Kid.
I knew if I didn’t go back with something to eat he would come and find
me and lick the stuffing out of me. I told Mrs. Olson--that was her
name--that I would have to go but that I’d come back that night. For a
moment I don’t think she believed me, but at last she let me go, giving
me quite a lot of grub.

“I went back to the bunch and that night just after we’d hopped a
freight at the water tank, I took a chance and jumped. By the time the
Denver Kid knew I’d gone, the train was rolling too fast for him to
follow me.”

“Weren’t you hurt?” asked Bob.

“A few scratches and bruises. Nothing much. But I didn’t care; I was
free. I walked back to the farm, camped out under a haystack and the
next morning showed up for breakfast. Mrs. Olson certainly was good to
me while I was there. After harvest she made me stay on and let me go
to school. I paid for my keep by doing chores.”

“Didn’t the Denver Kid come back after you?” Bob wanted to know.

“Never,” said Jerry. “At first I figured he would, but after a month,
when he didn’t show up, I doped it out that he thought I’d fallen off
the train and been killed. Anyhow, I stayed with the Olson’s until I
had learned all that the school there could teach me. Mrs. Olson died
soon after and I couldn’t bear to stay around any longer. She was as
near to folks as I ever had.”

“That was tough,” said Bob sympathetically. “What’d you do then?”

“I just drifted. I followed the harvest westward and then I had a
chance to take some cattle down to Colorado. It was about then I met
Steve Whitney, and he gave me a job, and here I am.”

“How did you meet him?” asked Bob, expecting that Jerry had found his
job in some exciting way. But he was disappointed.

“I was hanging around the little town I was in, waiting for something
to turn up. There was a project under way a few miles out and I hiked
over to give it a look. The Chief caught me on the dam and thought I
looked sort of hungry. Shipped me to the mess tent and afterwards put
me to work. That’s all. Now I’m here. And I’ve told you my yarn,” said
Jerry at last. “There’s not much to it, is there?”

Bob was silent a moment, contrasting the life of ease he had spent with
the experiences he had just listened to. Before he could speak, Jerry
went on, laughing shortly.

“I’m sorry that I inflicted it all upon you, Bob. I was sort of acting
the cry baby, wasn’t I?”

“Not at all. I think you have done a lot for yourself and it must have
been awfully exciting while you were about it. I’ve never had anything
more exciting in my life than just going to school. This engineering
is the biggest adventure I’ve ever had. But to-day--to-day’s about made
up for all I’ve missed in the past. I couldn’t want much better than
this, could I?”

“I should say not,” returned Jerry. “The last twelve hours ought to
last you for the rest of your life!”

They talked on until sleep overcame them. For his part, Bob went off
into dreamland feeling that the day had been well spent. The adventures
had been big adventures and he and Jerry had come through safely. Jerry
had loosened up and had come out of his shell and Bob knew that he had
made a new friend and a good one.




CHAPTER VI

THE END OF THE LABYRINTH


But a disappointment awaited them in the morning. The craft that had
brought them this far was quite beyond repair. It would perhaps not
have been impossible to patch it up if they had had the necessary
tools, but, lacking them, the boat was a total wreck.

“What can we do?” said Bob, his tone showing his dismay. “Seems like we
are in a bad fix. ‘No boat, no can go!’ as the Chinaman says.”

Jerry, however, was not so pessimistic. “Oh, I’m not beaten yet. I
think I’ve got a scheme that’ll work, although it means we won’t be dry
again until we get out of the canyon.”

“What do you mean? Are we going to swim the rest of the way?”

“You’re not far off,” said Jerry, laughing. “But even if we’ve got to
swim we won’t have to carry all our junk. Have you thought what a
bully raft our air mattress will make?”

“Gee whiz, that’s some idea,” said Bob. “We can load our stuff on it
and let it float down stream, can’t we?”

“You bet! But it will be pretty rough going. We’ll have to nurse it
pretty carefully. A submarine rock could torpedo it in a minute. But
come on, let’s try it.”

They blew up the mattress to its fullest extent and launched it. Piling
on it the things they felt absolutely necessary to take with them, they
were overjoyed to find the improvised raft equal to the task. The rest
of the truck had to be abandoned.

“Well, might as well start, I reckon,” said Bob. “This is the first
time I’ve ever gone in for an all-day swim. We won’t really _need_ a
bath the rest of the summer after this.” Jerry laughed a reply.

It didn’t turn out to be so bad as they had imagined. Shortly after
they started the river grew smoother and shallower, so that wading
was quite possible. During the afternoon of the next day, with almost
startling suddenness they found themselves out of the canyon. It ended
almost as surprisingly as it had begun. A sudden bend through the high
cliffs and they were in the open country.

Bob turned to Jerry and shook his hand. “We’ve done it, old boy. We’ve
beaten the Labyrinth.”

In the midst of their mutual congratulations a hail came to them from
the bank. Surprised, they looked up to see a figure waving to them.
They pulled ashore and found a grizzled old man standing up beside a
camp fire.

“Did ye come through the gap?” was his greeting in a mild, unsurprised
tone.

The boys answered in the affirmative. The old man nodded his head.
“Pretty good, pretty good. You sho’ surprised me. Only ones what I’ve
seen come through before have been dead ones. Sit ’round and in a
minute I’ll have something to eat for ye.”

Jerry recognized the type at once. It was a desert rat, one of those
old men who, lured by the dream of gold, haunt the desert, usually
alone. Years pass over their heads in the search which never ends.
At last the gold mine that they will find some day becomes merely
the excuse not the aim of the unending pilgrimage. The desert, the
loneliness is claiming them. If they found a mine worth the developing,
probably they would sell it and blow in the proceeds and be off again
as soon as possible. They have been too long away from civilization for
anything to surprise them. The desert is mysterious, the loneliness
makes everything possible.

The old man’s meal was sour dough biscuits and a sort of soup made from
jerked beef and river water. But he offered it to them and served it
as if it were a banquet. To the tired, hungry boys it _was_ a banquet.
They had done tremendous deeds on a diet of canned goods and any change
was welcome.

The old man ventured no further curiosity in what they had done. They
had come through the Labyrinth, he had accepted the fact, and that was
all there was to it. He spoke very little and when the boys asked the
way to the nearest railroad, his answer was given in rather a relieved
tone. It was as if he would be glad to have the silence to himself
again.

To the boys’ great joy, they found they had come out of the canyon at a
point only twenty miles from the railroad. They determined to hike for
it the next day. Before they started the next morning, Bob had an idea.

“Let’s give the old fellow our air mattress. We won’t need it any more
and maybe he would like it.”

“Bully,” agreed Jerry and took it over to the old man.

They showed him how to blow it up and then let all the air out and
rolled it up into a small parcel. He was as delighted as a child with
a new toy and thanked them for it. At last they started out on their
hike, carrying with them only enough food for lunch, the transit and as
much water as possible. When they were about fifty feet from camp, the
old man called out after them.

“I forgot to ask what this here thing you give me might be for.”

“To sleep on.”

“Well, you’d better take it back, then,” he said. “I hain’t slept on
nothin’ but the old earth here for forty year and I reckon I won’t
sleep on nothin’ else until I sleep _in_ it. This here thing ain’t
goin’ to do me no good.”

The boys laughed and Jerry called back, “Well, give it to the burro to
sleep on then.”

With a last wave of the hand, the boys started on their long hike.

From the river the country had looked flat. But once faced in the
direction the old man had told them to go, they found the way was quite
hilly. Perhaps they had been so used during the past days in the canyon
to the walls towering straight up on each side of them that the gradual
rise did seem flat. But they soon realized it would be quite a climb.

Noon still found them ascending and they ate their lunch and hurried
on. It was sizzling. There were some trees, but these were few and far
between. Most of the footing was sandy and made hard walking. Owing to
these conditions it was not until after nightfall that they saw the
first sign of civilization. Bob was in the lead and was the first to
see a reflection on the horizon.

“I thought I saw a light ahead, Jerry,” he cried. “Way off there.”

“Heat lightning, I guess,” returned the other, but before the words
were out of his mouth the same phenomenon occurred and this time he saw
it.

“Take it all back, Bob; you’re right. I saw it too.”

“But what is it?”

“Reflection from the fire box of an engine on the smoke that passes
over. The reason it comes in flashes is that it only shows when the
fireman opens the door to pitch on another scoop of coal. Yes, there it
is again!” They plodded on, much encouraged.

Jerry had jollied and cheered up Bob during the long tramp, for Bob,
while more adapted to the water, found himself at a disadvantage beside
his new chum when it came to navigating the desert. When at last they
made the track, they were footsore and weary. Finishing their last
bit of water, the boys started to walk the ties in the direction they
thought the nearest station must be. But after a few steps Bob refused
to go farther.

“I don’t care what you do,” he announced to Jerry, “but I stop right
here, and unless you give me a shove off the track I probably will
sleep right between the rails. The morning will be plenty soon enough
for me to go on, hungry as I am.”

“I won’t argue with you,” said Jerry. “And I guess the sand will seem
just about as comfortable as any feather bed could, the way I feel. I’m
right with you.”

The intense desert sun, however, woke them early to the realization of
their weary muscles. Bob was up first and disturbed Jerry’s slumbers by
a sudden peal of laughter.

Drowsily Jerry demanded, “What’s so all-fired funny, you early bird?”

“Get up and look,” giggled Bob.

The other scrambled to his feet and, blinkingly, scanned the horizon.
Not more than a quarter of a mile away was a water tank and a few
houses! The night had been so dark and they had come to the railroad so
late that all the lights had been extinguished in the settlement. But
as far as they were concerned, the town might just as well have been
ten miles away instead of the few yards it was in reality.

“I guess it was a good one on us, all right,” Jerry had to admit.
“Come on and we’ll see if we can rustle up some breakfast. Also a wash
up. We must be two awful looking sights.”

They found something to eat and water to wash in and felt ten times
better.

No questions were asked them. Evidently they were taken for tramps who
had a little money.

They decided they might just as well find out if there was any news
from Whiskers before they made any move, so they telegraphed to the
Grand Canyon, asking that any telegram that had come be forwarded on to
them. Then they proceeded to loaf until the answer arrived.

“Gee, this is bully,” commented Bob, as he lay stretched out on the
porch of the general store, out of the glare of the sun. “I never
thought just resting could be such fun!”

Jerry grunted an assent, too lazy to return a remark.

Neither boy had the energy to lift a finger. They were dead tired and
the mere fact of doing nothing was infinitely enjoyable. They had a
whole day of this, for it was not until the following morning that an
answer came to their wire. It proved to be from the Boss and had been
sent from Washington.

“Be at Las Cruces on June 20.”

“We’ve just got time to make it,” said Jerry. “That was sent three days
ago and right now Mr. Whitney ought to be pulling out of Kansas City.
We’ll catch the local out and be there just before he arrives.”




CHAPTER VII

THE PROJECT


“Well, fellows, what’d you do with yourselves while I was away? Must
have been pretty tiresome up at the Canyon, wasn’t it?” It was Mr.
Whitney talking. He had told them that his trip to Washington had
been a great success. They had sent for him to put him in charge of
finishing up the big Rio Grande project.

“That’s great!” said Jerry, who had experience enough to know that a
great honor had been conferred on his Chief. The Rio Grande project was
the biggest thing the Service had yet attempted and to be in charge of
it was equivalent to a high promotion.

Bob Hazard knew from Jerry’s spontaneous outburst that Mr. Whitney was
to be congratulated, so he made a little speech.

“Thanks, fellows, thanks,” laughed the Chief. “It will be fine for all
of us. But that’s enough of my news--what have you chaps been up to?
Been bored?”

“Oh, we found plenty to do,” said Jerry.

“At the Canyon?” asked Mr. Whitney. “I don’t see how you could. It is a
pretty dreary place, if you have to be there long.”

“But we weren’t at the Canyon,” put in Bob.

“So? You surprise me. But wherever you were, I bet you were in
mischief. Just from the look of you two, I can see that you were up to
some devilment. Besides, you’re almost boiling over with the desire to
tell me about it. Come on, out with it.”

“We went through the Labyrinth Canyon,” said Jerry calmly.

This news made Steve Whitney jump out of his chair. “What!” he cried.
“You went through the Labyrinth? You’re joking.”

“Not at all,” said Bob calmly. “We got tired of doing nothing and we
went up the Green River and went through it.”

“But--but nobody’s ever gone through alive,” stammered the man. “I’ve
always wanted to try it myself but never found the chance. How did you
do it?”

“Boat partly and swimming,” returned Jerry, anxious to state the exact
facts.

“But didn’t you have an awful time?”

“Oh, it wasn’t so bad,” said Bob. “Once or twice we had a little
trouble but all in all it was just fun. And the reason we went was
because Jerry thought there might possibly be a project there.”

The calm way in which the boys announced their feat forced Whiskers to
believe what at first glance seemed to be a preposterous yarn.

“I’m sure proud of you two,” he said warmly. “But I ought not to be.
It was a foolhardy thing to do and if you had asked my permission I
certainly would not have given it.” But as he reproved them his eyes
glistened with the pride he felt. “I want to hear all about it, but
first tell me, did you find a place where you think a dam could be
built? There is a wonderful valley out there ready to spring into life
if we only could get water to it.”

“You bet we found a place,” said Jerry. “The dam is already half built
by nature. Besides, I feel sure a road can be made down from the top of
the canyon.”

“That’s great!” said Steve Whitney. “Now go ahead and spin me the whole
yarn.”

Jerry let Bob tell of their adventure, putting in a word here and
there. But when it came to the part where Bob had saved his life after
dropping over the waterfall, he took the narrative in his own hands
and in spite of Bob’s protests, told the Chief the whole story of the
rescue.

When they had finished, Mr. Whitney was very much excited. “We’ll have
to make a report of your find to Washington at once and, if possible,
get a bill brought up in the next Congress to authorize us to make a
preliminary survey. We can do it next summer.”

That their discovery had a good chance of being acted upon, was a big
measure of reward to the two boys. Mr. Whitney’s interest seemed to
settle the matter.

“You--you think Congress will authorize it?” ventured Bob, just to make
sure.

“They will have to!” was the confident reply. “I’ll draw up a report
the moment we strike camp! But now we’ll have to run for our train.
I’ve been so interested, I forgot the time.”

The trip passed quickly for Bob and his Chief. Mr. Whitney was on his
way to the biggest job he had yet tackled, and Bob would taste for the
first time the flavor of the work he felt he most wanted to do. To
Jerry, however, the train was only bringing him to a new spell of hard
labor.

When at last the jolting cars stopped, they found a car waiting, into
which the three piled. Once under way, Bob asked Mr. Whitney, “Doesn’t
the railroad go into the camp? It seems to me it must be pretty heavy
hauling all the big machinery from here across the desert.”

“A railroad goes to the job all right, Bob, but it’s meant for freight
and a train runs only three times a week. The line was built by the
Service and belongs to the Government. We’ve come the wrong day to
catch that train.”

“I see. And does the Service build other things besides dams and
railroads?”

“Surely! On a job like this so far away from any regular transportation
line the Service has to construct all the necessities of life--and some
luxuries. It built the town that we’ll be coming to shortly, put in the
electric light system, erected a school and a hospital. In some places
we’ve even built a motion picture theatre to keep the men satisfied.
Probably there’s one on this job. When I was up here last they were
planning it. I bet you never thought Uncle Sam was in the amusement
business.”

Bob laughed. “There sure must be a lot of men working up there.”

“It’s a young city. But here we are.”

The road had been steadily climbing and now it topped the crest of the
hill. Before their eyes lay a wonderful panorama. To the north, the
wide valley of the river stretched into the distance, a winding band of
green and gold, flanked on each side by the glowing desert. Immediately
below them the peaceful face of nature was broken.

It was the place where the dam was to be built--where already part
of it was built. From the height from which they looked the network
of cables and railroad tracks and rushing ant-like figures, seemed a
confused jumble without a sense of direction. But as the car coasted
down the well-made road--also constructed by the Government, Bob
learned later--the jumble became clearer. The cables, extending
from one side of the hill to the other, carried buckets which rushed
incessantly to and fro. These were lowered and hoisted seemingly by
chance. The puffing engines pulled cars of rock to the crusher and
backed away for new loads. The swarming men now showed themselves
as workers, the directing units, and their rushing about was merely
carrying out their part of the great work.

Finally the car came to a stop before a large two-story adobe house.
The boys followed Mr. Whitney inside. “This is the Quarter-house,”
Mr. Whitney explained as they went in. “They have rooms here for the
engineering force and it is also used as a hotel if any guests happen
to come along. I’ll see if you boys can be put up here until we can
find permanent quarters for you.”

Hardly were they over the threshhold, before a short, stocky,
middle-aged man came up to them. He rushed up to Whitney with
outstretched hands and said, “I certainly am glad to see you, Whitney.
Ted Adams has been gone two weeks and I have been expecting you almost
any day. I couldn’t get down to meet you at the station, as they needed
me over at the spillway. Little matter of extra shoring. It’s all right
now.”

The Chief shook the other man’s hand warmly. “You’re staying on, aren’t
you, Taylor?” And when the other nodded his assent, he continued, “I’m
glad! Couldn’t have better luck! I was hoping that you would stick as
my assistant. My first job for you is to find jobs for a couple of
rodmen I brought along with me. Here, boys, I want to introduce you to
Mr. Taylor, the assistant engineer and therefore your immediate boss.”

Taylor had flushed at Mr. Whitney’s words of confidence. It was easy to
see that he would probably always be an assistant, never a full-fledged
chief. He was the kind of man who could execute orders perfectly but
when left with the responsibility of making decisions for himself, was
likely to become flustered and upset. He took refuge in the inquiry
about the boys.

“There’ll be plenty of work for ’em. It happens we’re a little short
on rodmen just now. But about sleeping quarters--I’ve got your house
ready for you, Whitney, and as soon as your dunnage comes along you can
move right in,” he said.

“That’s fine,” returned Whitney. “But the boys--”

“Oh, there’s room here for the time being. We can see about something
else later. But you must be famished. Come along to my shack. It’s
about supper time. You come too, fellows. The regular mess is over.”

Both Bob and Jerry were overjoyed at the invitation. The long trip had
made them hungry and they rather wondered where their supper would come
from. Mr. Taylor waited until they had taken their suit cases up to the
room that had been assigned them and then the little group walked up
the street to the cottage that was the assistant engineer’s. His wife,
a pleasant-faced woman, welcomed them and seemed especially pleased
to see Whitney. Bob realized that his friend evidently was a great
favorite and had made many friends during his years in the Service.

Mrs. Taylor had prepared what seemed to Bob an especially fine supper,
considering that they were miles away from civilization. During a lull
in the conversation he mentioned it. She was much pleased.

“Oh, New York has very little on us up here,” she said. “What with a
cold storage plant and an ice factory, we don’t want for anything.”

It was so. In this frontier camp practically all the comforts that the
civilization of a city could give were present: electric lights, ice,
excellent stores--and the movie theatre. It was like transplanting a
little corner of a city.

After supper they went out on the porch from which could be seen the
works. Dusk had come during the meal and already the stars shone pale
in the sky. Down at their feet vague outlines of the excavations could
be seen, the darker shadows marking their extent. Down to the left was
a cluster of bright lights.

“What is that?” Bob asked.

“The town,” was the answer; “the mechanics’ houses and the bunk houses
for the Mexican laborers. The only people who live up here on the hill
are the engineers and executives.”

When the men got their cigars lighted they began to talk. Whitney was
of course anxious to know what the situation was on the job he was
to tackle in the morning. If the laborers were satisfied, how the
work was progressing, and a thousand and one other things he needed
to know bubbled forth. The assistant engineer was a veritable mine of
information. Practically every question was answered without a moment’s
hesitation. Bob was contented to sit and listen, drinking in all the
information he could. This was the Reclamation Service and to-morrow
would see him taking an active part in the work.




CHAPTER VIII

BOB’S CHANCE


To Bob’s great disgust his first job was not out on the construction
work. Whiskers had turned him over to Mr. Taylor, who set him to work
in the draughting room. All day long he sat on a stool, and did simple
sums: endless multiplications and divisions of figures that came from
the blue prints made by the engineers. It was stupid work and had in it
little of the romance which he had always associated with the work he
was to do. However, he comforted himself with the thought that if it
were not necessary, the Chief would never set him at it.

Jerry, on account of his experience, had at once been assigned to
active outside work as the aid of one of the many junior assistant
engineers. At night he would tell Bob of the day’s work and commiserate
with him that his lot was not as exciting. But at lunch hour and
after work was over for the day, Bob found a chance to investigate the
outside work. It was fascinating. Along one side of the valley the
river had been forced by means of a temporary dam into an artificial
channel, called the spillway, so that the river bottom where the dam
was to be built should be clear of water. From the river bed rose the
rough foundations of the permanent dam.

It was like a giant staircase on the side which would not come against
the water. It was about half finished when Bob first got there, but
each day it rose steadily higher and higher. Bob examined it all. Each
operation he came to fascinated him, and by using his eyes he soon grew
to understand much of the method by which results were achieved.

It was weeks before there came a break in the monotony of his work.
He had forced himself to be cheerful about his stupid job and not to
show by the least sign that he was not entirely content with the work
he had been set to do. Mr. Taylor, who since the advent of the Chief,
had taken charge of the office work, spoke to Mr. Whitney. “That boy,
Hazard, is a good lad,” he said. “Although the plucky beggar won’t own
up, I think he is eating his heart out at the draughting board. I can
get along without him, so give him a chance outside if you can.”

“A little office work won’t do him any harm,” commented Mr. Whitney. “I
asked you to put him to work there on purpose. I don’t want him to get
too inflated an idea of the romance of engineering. But I’ll remember
what you said and if something turns up I’ll see what I can do.”

The time was to come sooner than either Taylor or Whitney expected.
The Chief Engineer had been so busy familiarizing himself with all the
details of the outside work that he had spent little time in the office
and so had not often seen Bob. Not an activity, from the operation of
the railway branch to the pouring of a new batch of concrete on the dam
itself, had escaped his inspection. He wanted to know all the foremen
of the different gangs, to size them up, and to gain their personal
loyalty. The long experience he had had in bossing men, taught him that
being human and approachable did not impair discipline. Besides, in
times of emergency, the men could be more counted on.

From the men with whom he came into contact, Bob Hazard realized that
his boss was rapidly becoming very popular. Every one was singing his
praises and the general feeling was that the work was going ahead at
a pace never equalled under the preceding engineers. All this was
pleasing to the boy who had idolized the man, and helped him to be
content with the work at which he had been placed.

It was not of course the sort of life he had pictured. That had
been rather a vague idea of khaki-clad figures, perched with their
instruments on perilous peaks and over yawning chasms; and a general
idea of romance had run through his dreams. To be put into an office to
do sums was little better than going to school. That his drawing board
faced a window below which the job spread out, was a help, for while
his mind mechanically did the figuring that was necessary, he could
imagine himself out on the work mingling with the crowd.

One part of the activity drew him especially. This was the cableway
system. Between the towers set up on the high ground on each side of
the river, the strands of wire rope were suspended. Along them ran
great pulleys from which the buckets hung. The buckets would flash
across Bob’s vision endlessly, carrying loads of mixed concrete, of
sand, of anything that was needed.

Their flight was swift, swooping something like a bird’s. From one
tower the bucket would speed, only to stop silently and, almost before
its crossways movement had ended, it would drop to the surface of the
work. An instant to unload the bucket and in a flash it was up and
gliding like the wind back to its starting point.

There was something so fascinating, so rhythmical in this operation,
that Bob had difficulty in tearing his eyes away and concentrating on
his work.

One morning, however, something new occurred to distract his attention.
Happening to glance out of the window, he saw Jerry coming up the path
to the office, running with all the speed of which he was capable.

The door of the draughting room was open into the hall where the
telephone central was seated. Her job was trying to keep in touch with
all the different division chiefs so that they might be found if any
emergency should occur. Therefore Bob knew that he would hear what was
the cause of this especial emergency that had galvanized Jerry into
such a tremendous haste.

“The Chief!” he heard Jerry pant as the footsteps ended in the hall.
“Where is he?”

“Mixer last!” snapped the girl, plugging in and ringing her call at the
same time. “I’ll see if he’s still there!”

“Meantime, where’s Mr. Taylor? He’d help--”

“Can’t get him--gone to Las Cruces. Yes, hello, Mixer? The Chief? Gone?
Yes, yes! Where? North end spillway! Right! ’Bye.” She pulled out the
plug and said to Jerry, “Started for spillway ten minutes ago. No phone
there yet. Take fifteen minutes get messenger there--can you wait?”

“No,” said Jerry. “Mr. Rutherford, my chief, wants him. Wall of
auxiliary spillway this side of the river giving way--will flood all
the buttress excavation. We’re shoring it, but Mr. Rutherford wants the
Chief and in a hurry. I’m off but I’m afraid I’ll get him too late! If
he calls up send him to Mr. Rutherford at once!” With this Jerry shot
out of the office and down the hill, evidently planning to make his
legs take him to the Chief.

Inside, Bob had been listening with wide open ears and his mind
pictured the scene Jerry had left to find Mr. Whitney and filled out
the holes the winded boy had left in his description. He knew the
auxiliary spillway and the harm it could do if it should fail to carry
its burden. It was a temporary affair of wood to be used only until a
system of drains could be built to take care of the excess water that
collected below the coffer dam. His mind’s eye saw Rutherford and Jerry
at the dangerous place: Rutherford, young and inexperienced, doing what
he could to avert disaster, but rattled, probably badly so. He wanted
Mr. Whitney or somebody with practical knowledge and he had sent Jerry
off to bring help. All Bob could do was to hope that the wall would
hold.

Reluctantly he started to take up his dreary work but on the way to the
board, his eyes glanced through the window and rested on a grab bucket
that was speeding through the air. For a second the sight meant nothing
special to him, then suddenly it brought him to his feet. Without a
word to the other draughtsmen he dashed out of the room, not waiting to
snatch his cap.

A plan had come to him in a flash. Whitney was needed and needed in a
hurry. He was on the other side of the river valley at the head of the
spillway. The opposite cableway tower over there was near this spot--if
the buckets could go over, couldn’t he? He’d try anyway!

With all the speed he could muster he ran towards the cable tower,
thanking his stars that the control station was on this side of the
river, and that he knew one of the lever men. It was this fellow’s job
to dispatch the buckets and hoist and lower them.

“Trouble below, Billy!” gasped Bob as he came to the shed that
protected the operator from the rays of the sun. “Need the Big Boss.
He’s over at the spillway. Shoot me over?”

“’Gainst rules, son,” was the man’s answer, pulling a lever which made
a great bucket shoot up from the depths.

“But this--this is serious,” cried the boy. “Rules don’t count! They’ve
got to have him!”

“Sorry,” was the short response, “but orders are orders. Nothing doing.”

Bob continued to waste a few precious seconds in a vain endeavor to
move his friend Billy, but kept his eye on the returning bucket. It
came almost to Billy’s shed and then, in response to a sharp jerk on a
lever, it dropped into the mixing shed of the concrete plant.

A way of overcoming this obstacle came to Bob. Without wasting any more
time talking he rushed down to the concrete shed to get there just as
the loading gang had finished changing the great hook of the cableway
from the empty bucket to a full one. The foreman had his hand raised
to signal Billy to hoist away when Bob darted in and jumped onto the
bucket.

The foreman was so surprised that involuntarily his hand made the
signal and a second later Bob was climbing through space, faster than a
rocket!

The wind whistled in his ears and he was choked by the rapid ascent,
yet the sensation was not entirely unpleasant. It was like riding in
the fastest elevator he’d ever been in--at triple the speed.

Not until the bucket had reached the height of the cableway was he able
to take any interest in looking about him. The second or so that had
elapsed since he had taken passage on the concrete conveyor had been
fully occupied in putting himself in a position where he could hold on
and not be in danger of being tipped over the side. Worming himself
around he found he could seat himself comfortably in the hook that held
the bucket and clasp his arms around the great iron ball that hung just
under the many sheaved pulley.

When this was done he ventured a look over the side. From the attitude
of Billy he knew that the operator had seen him. What would Billy do?
The success of his whole scheme depended on it. He had figured that the
man would be sport enough to shoot him across if he had once got on the
bucket and was on his way.

The speed of the bucket slackened as it neared the cable height and for
an agonizing second he thought that Billy was about to drop him back
to the spot he had started from. It would be a rotten ending to his
adventure, and the whole camp would have the laugh on him. On a sudden
impulse he disengaged one hand and motioned that he wanted to go on.

It was a dangerous expedient but it was worth it, for Billy, resigned
to the situation, waved back and a moment later the bucket started to
swoop towards the other shore.

Bob was facing the way in which they were going and he was conscious
that it was like sliding down a great hill, for the cable above him
dipped towards the center. There was little time for thought, however,
as the bucket lost no time in gathering headway. At one moment it was
almost still, the next it was whistling through the air.

The first down rush was glorious. Not until he started to climb up the
other incline of the cable did Bob give any thought to the speed he was
making. There was a slight slackening in the rush through the air, but
so quickly was the whole journey over that Bob’s first impression was
the one that he slipped off the bucket with when it touched ground at
the foot of the west tower.

Billy had been a sport! He had shot Bob just as far over as he could
and the boy was correspondingly grateful.

The inspection trips he had made outside of working hours now proved
a great help, for he knew the quickest way to the place the Chief was
supposed to be. Setting out on a run he was soon there. Mr. Whitney
was engaged in conversation with the foreman but broke off as the boy
rushed up.

“What’s the row, Bob?” he wanted to know.

“Need you--quick--over at the east spillway--wall giving way--” But
faster than the words could tremble out, the Chief was acting.

“Come along,” he directed. “Talk as we go!”

He made tracks for a dinky engine that was hitched to a load of empties.

“Uncouple!” he yelled to the engineer. As he and Bob swung into the
cab, the little locomotive was already moving slowly. “To the east
bank, quick!” he ordered and caught the whistle cord. The prolonged
screech told the switchmen and other trains that something serious was
afoot, and that the line must be cleared.

“Know anything else?” demanded the Chief as the engine rocked crazily
on the narrow gauge track, and when Bob shook his head, asked, “How did
you get over?”

“Bucket,” said the boy briefly.

“Good idea,” commented Mr. Whitney and was silent until the engine
pulled up snorting as near their destination as it could get. “Come
along,” invited Mr. Whitney as he swung off the engine. Pleased, Bob
did his best to keep up with his long-legged boss who had headed for
the point of trouble with great strides.

It has taken a long time to describe the things that had happened to
Bob since he heard Jerry’s predicament in the office, yet the actual
time it had taken him to get Mr. Whitney to the scene of action was
hardly a handful of minutes. This was proved by the fact that Bob had
a confused belief that halfway back on the little engine he had seen
Jerry on his way to find Mr. Whitney. These thoughts mingled in his
brain as he followed his Chief to the temporary spillway.

Nothing serious had happened so far, he was glad to see, as they came
upon Mr. Rutherford and the gang of men who were attempting to shore up
the wall of the stream. The waterway at this point was built entirely
of wood and the present trouble was due either to an unexpected
pressure of water or some defect in construction.

The gang had been working feverishly and without much order until Steve
Whitney came on the scene. Bob was amazed at the change that seemed to
take place as soon as his Chief had uttered a few incisive directions.
The rescue work went on smoothly and efficiently. There was no panic,
no blundering.

“Here, you men, down stream a bit with that timber. Rutherford, you’ve
the right idea--stick to it. Rush ’em up, boys,” to a gang bringing up
a supply of planks. “Have you diverted any of the water, Rutherford?”

“No, sir, I--I never thought of--”

“You should have!” This was all the rebuke the young engineer was to
get. Perhaps it was because Whitney did things that way, that all his
men adored him. He did not think that because a man made a mistake that
he should be shamed before his fellow workers. He turned to Bob.

“Chase up to the dam line. There’s an overflow gate in the spillway
there. Break it open!”

Bob hustled off on his errand and found the place the Chief had
designated. A few blows with a stone and he had loosened the gate
sufficiently to let a big stream of water flow out.

“What the dickens are you doing?” yelled the foreman of a surfacing
gang, starting for the boy on a run. “Want to flood the works?”

“Keep your shirt on! Chief’s orders!” but he had to explain the whole
matter before the man realized that he was not an anarchist. The
foreman’s strength added to his was sufficient to give the water a
clear outlet, and Bob saw with satisfaction that the body of water
passing down the canal to the weakened spot was considerably less.

When he reported to the Chief he found that all danger was past and
the gang at work making a permanent repair of the damage.

“Good work,” said Mr. Whitney as the boy came up. “Water slackened just
in time.” Then he turned to Rutherford.

“When you finish the shoring, close the gate immediately.”

Suddenly Bob remembered that he had left his job in the office without
anybody’s authority. The excitement had made him forget that he had
a job. Now, when everything was quiet, the realization that probably
he had been missed came to him and he started to make tracks in the
general direction of the office. He had not gone far, however, when he
heard a familiar voice hail him from behind. It was Mr. Whitney, so he
slowed up and turned.

“Hold on, Bob. I want to speak to you.”

A moment later Mr. Whitney was beside him, an expression on his face
which the boy could not fathom. It was a stern look yet there was a
twinkle in the kind eyes. His first words were ominous.

“What are you doing away from your drawing board? Did Mr. Taylor send
you for me?”

“No--no, sir,” stammered Bob, helplessly. “He wasn’t there--he’s in Las
Cruces--”

“And you came across the river on the cableway, didn’t you?”

“Yes, sir. It was the only--”

“No excuses! It means that you have broken discipline twice, doesn’t
it? Left your work and then rode a bucket, which is against all orders.
I’ll have to fire that control operator who let you do it.”

“He couldn’t help it!” cried the boy, horrified that what he had done
might get someone else into trouble. “I jumped the bucket in the mixing
plant and I was halfway across before Billy ever saw me!”

“So that’s how you did it!” ejaculated the Chief. “In that case I may
not have to do more than reprimand Billy.”

“That’s fine!” said the much relieved boy.

“But as for you--I must punish you much more severely,” the twinkle in
the man’s eyes grew more pronounced, and in spite of himself he smiled.
“You are sentenced to be _my_ rodman, to stay with me all the time
we’re on the job.”

“Gee whiz!” whistled Bob, the suddenness of the turn the talk had taken
amazing him. “Then--then what I did was right?”

“You bet it was! Both right and plucky. I’m proud of you--”

“And I’m going to be on your own corps? This is too much,” and the boy
laughed happily.

“Yes, Bob,” said Steve Whitney seriously, “I want someone on whom I
can rely to think quickly and not lose his head in an emergency. Rules
and regulations must be broken when the jam is tight enough--and many
tight jams occur in the Service. You proved to-day that you used your
brains and were plucky enough to act on what your brain told you to do.
Probably the few minutes you saved in getting me, were worth thousands
of dollars to the Service and days of delay. If that spillway wall had
broken, the buttress excavations would have filled and all the digging
work would have had to be done over.”

Before Bob could stammer his thanks, the Chief continued, “Report to me
in the morning. Better go back now and finish up your work.”

The conversation had taken place as they climbed the hill to the Upper
Town. Now, Mr. Whitney went off in the direction of his cottage, and
Bob to the office.

That night Jerry came in late to the room that he still shared with Bob.

“Lucky stiff!” he said pleasantly. “Beat me to it, didn’t you?”

“Reckon so,” grinned Bob happily. “Sore?”

“Not a bit--only wish I’d thought of it. Was the old man pleased?”

“He made me his rodman, if that’s any sign.”

“You _are_ lucky but I’m mighty glad for you. It’ll be a heap more fun
than that office work.”

Bob thought he detected a little note of disappointment in his chum’s
tone, but the words of congratulation seemed sincere.

“It will be your turn next,” said Bob as they turned off the light.




CHAPTER IX

THE DAM


“So you want me to tell you something about the dam?” said Mr. Whitney,
smiling at his rodman. The two were sitting on the side of a hill
overlooking the construction work several days after Bob had been
promoted from the office to the proud position of being the Chief’s
aide. He had been on a message to the cofferdam gang and had returned
to find the boss seemingly loafing. When he saw there might be a few
free moments before he was set to work again he ventured some questions
regarding the thing that was of most interest to him.

The way Mr. Whitney answered was encouraging, so Bob came back, “Yes,
sir, I’d like to know a lot more about it than I do. Anything you
tell me is going to help. I’ve picked up a little here and there and
know some of the details but I don’t really know anything about the
general plan. Wasn’t there any irrigation on the Rio Grande before the
Reclamation Service took hold?”

“Indeed there was,” was the answer. “The Indians were the first
irrigators. The Pueblo or village Indians, as they were called, while
it was in a crude way, irrigated all the land on which they raised
corn. They were the first settlers of the Rio Grande Valley. We know
this is so, for one of the Spanish Conquistadores, Coronado by name,
wrote it down in the record of his travels. When he marched from the
south into what is now New Mexico in search of the gold which was
the aim and hope of all the adventurers of his time, he found the
Indians irrigating the land by means of crude ditches dug with their
primitive implements. This was the first record we have, but it has
been established beyond any reasonable doubt that such irrigation as he
found was practiced here by this river that flows below us long before
Columbus discovered America. The theory is that in all probability
irrigation along the Rio Grande was in vogue even before the Egyptians
used the waters of the Nile for the same purpose. When the first
Spanish settlers came along, and later the Americans, they adopted the
same methods of making the ground productive as had the Indians. All we
have done as time went on is to improve the general principles taken
from the savages. Of course, as we made better tools, we have been able
to build larger ditches and so increase the area of fertile land far
beyond the dreams of the Indians.”

“But, Mr. Whitney,” Bob put in, “if irrigation was such a success, why
weren’t more canals constructed before the Government took hold of the
job?”

Mr. Whitney laughed. “The greatest drawback was a ridiculous thing.
A long time ago a treaty was made with Mexico which prohibited the
storing of flood water on the Rio Grande and it’s the flood water that
is used in modern irrigation.”

“But how would that hurt the Mexicans?”

“The reason given was that the lack of water would interfere with
navigation, but when you realize that it isn’t until the Rio Grande
flows a thousand miles on the other side of the Mexican boundary
that any navigation begins, you can see how ridiculous _that_
objection was. We were able to get this treaty broken at last and have
substituted a new one in its place. Under this new treaty we guarantee
to deliver to Mexico a certain minimum number of gallons of water a
year and we are at liberty to do what we like with the remainder. By
building this dam we will give Mexico only one-tenth of the total
amount stored each year, yet that one-tenth is more than half as much
again as they are getting now!”

“That new treaty clears up the biggest trouble, then, doesn’t it?” said
Bob. “But in the early days of settlement I wouldn’t have thought that
the Mexicans would have enforced the old treaty.”

“I don’t suppose they could,” returned Mr. Whitney, “but the
uncertainty kept many a prospective irrigator from spending his time
or energy in the work. Now, however, even Mexico is strong for the
completion of the big dam, as it will irrigate a lot of her land which
before was desert. Besides, it will cost them nothing and that always
appeals to folks--including Mexicans!”

“It certainly is going to be some big dam,” said Bob, waving his hand
over the work spread out below them. “How high is it going to be?”

“If I remember the figures exactly, it will be two hundred and
twenty-five feet from the foundation to the top--almost as tall as the
Flatiron Building in New York. It will be nearly twelve hundred feet
from bank to bank across the top.”

“It will have to be awfully thick, won’t it, to be able to hold the
water?”

“It’ll be twenty feet through at the top. At the bottom it has to be
pretty nearly two hundred feet. Although it is all filled in now by
masonry, they had to dig down to bedrock and to get there they had to
excavate about five hundred and fifty thousand cubic yards of sand,
shale and rock. It’s sixty-five feet from the river bed to the bottom
of the foundation.”

“That must’ve been some job. I wish we had been here to do it, don’t
you, Mr. Whitney?”

The man smiled at the boy’s eagerness. “There will be other jobs for
us to do,” he said, “where we’ll go through with it from the start to
the finish. I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if about the time you have
graduated from college we would be ready to begin work on the Labyrinth
which you and Jerry found. You’ll come out to be my chief assistant and
we’ll do the whole thing.”

“That’ll be great,” said Bob, his face glowing. “But go ahead about
this dam. I’m learning more than I have all the time I’ve been here
poking around by myself. It ought to make a pretty big lake when once
the water is dammed up, shouldn’t it?”

“You bet,” said Mr. Whitney. “The lake will be forty miles long, and
if you started to walk around it, keeping directly on the shore line,
you would have covered two hundred miles before you could get to your
starting point. If the water it will hold was spread out one foot deep,
it would cover nearly five thousand miles or about twice the size of
the State of Delaware.”

“And how many gallons will it hold?”

“There will be so many that we have found it easier to figure in what
we call acre feet. The gallon figures are too cumbersome. An acre foot
is the amount of water that would be sufficient to cover an acre one
foot deep.”

“And the water of the reservoir would cover how many acres?”

“Two million at least,” he answered. “In gallons that would be
something around nine-hundred billion gallons. So you can see how much
easier it is to figure in acre feet.”

“I should say so,” said Bob. “But it must cost a fortune to construct
all this. Do you know about how much?”

“The estimate for the dam itself is five million, three hundred
thousand dollars, and the canals and other expenses will bring the
entire cost up to over seven million.”

“Gee, how will the farmers ever pay that off? Didn’t you tell me that
the money was only advanced by the Government and that the farmers
would have to return it after the water is delivered to them?”

“I did,” said Mr. Whitney, “but as the dam will furnish enough water
to irrigate one hundred and eighty thousand acres, you see that brings
the cost down to about forty dollars an acre, which won’t be much once
it is all under cultivation. This charge is like a mortgage--the
Government is secured by the land itself. But it won’t be long now--two
or three years at the outside--before the dam is finished and the land
is ready to be cultivated. Ted Adams, my predecessor here, finished up
a diversion dam below at Leesburg which has been a help.”

“What a wonderful thing it is,” Bob said at last.

“Yes,” he said, “it is wonderful. Centuries of primitive irrigation
have furnished the knowledge which has made this dam possible. It is
the greatest irrigation scheme ever attempted and I am proud that it is
to be my lot to finish it--mighty proud.” His eyes were on the swarming
crowd of men, the cable wires humming, the derricks shifting their
burdens, all the myriad activities that went to the building of _his_
dam. “It will be a dream fulfilled,” he said almost to himself. Then,
suddenly, he knocked the ashes from his pipe and got up. “Come, Bob,”
he said. “We must get on the job. We’re not bringing the finish along
any quicker by sitting here dreaming of it.”




CHAPTER X

TED HOYT


Two or three Sundays after they had come to the dam, Bob and Jerry
found themselves with a day on their hands.

“Come on, Bob, let’s get a couple of horses and ride up into the range
country. I hear there are some wonderful ranches farther up country.”

“No,” said Bob. “I’ll stick to the water. I found a canoe and I am just
aching to do some paddling. Come on with me.”

“Didn’t you get enough water in the Labyrinth?” laughed Jerry.

“I don’t think I’ll ever get enough water,” returned Bob. “Are you
coming?”

“No, I reckon I’ll let you go alone. Me for the high places!”

So the two boys spent their Sunday apart. The canoe had belonged
to one of the engineers who had left for another project, and the
storekeeper who had bought it was willing to rent it out. Bob decided
to go down stream the first day and take a look at the land which would
be irrigated by the water stored up by the dam when it was finished. He
took his lunch with him as he expected to make an all day trip of it.

Soon after leaving civilization the river broadened out into a shallow
slow-moving stream. Bob lay back in the canoe and merely paddled
sufficiently to steer it, letting the lazy current carry him slowly
along. Close to the river bank everything was green and fresh looking,
but this vegetation did not extend so far that Bob could not see where
the green left off and the desert began.

His mind’s eye pictured the network of canals that would run off on
each side and which, by bringing that magic thing, water, to the
parched earth, would transform it into fruitful acres. Once around a
bend from the dam he was alone in the immense country. Not a vestige of
human occupancy could be seen. The desert stretched way out on either
side, broken here and there by hills, or buttes, as they are called.

Therefore, when he saw in the distance a figure seated on a rock
fishing, it came as a great surprise. He pointed the canoe’s nose
toward the fisherman. When he got close he saw that it was a boy of
perhaps his own age.

“Hello,” said the stranger as he grew nearer. “Where you from? The dam?”

“Yep,” answered Bob.

“But what are you doing down here?”

“Just out on a little jaunt. Where did you come from?”

“I live over the hill there,” answered the other boy. “Dad’s a stock
raiser. You can see the house from the river after you get down a
little further. I sneaked away from my old man this morning to see if
I could get a few fish. They aren’t biting very good here, though,” he
concluded. “I wish I had a boat, because I know of a peach of a place--”

“Come along with me then,” suggested Bob. “I would be tickled to death
to have company, especially if you’ve got another line and plenty of
bait.”

“Sure Mike!” said the other boy. “I’m with you.” And he stepped
gingerly into the canoe. The newcomer did not seem particularly
familiar with the easily capsized craft, yet Bob noted with
satisfaction that he had sense enough to keep very quiet once he was
aboard.

As Bob shot out into the stream he asked the newcomer, “Want to paddle?”

“Don’t know much about it, to tell you the truth. All the boatin’ I’ve
done was in a flat bottomed scow I had up to the last flood. The high
water swiped it on me and I reckon the Mexicans have got it by now,” he
grinned. “I felt pretty sore about losing it, but my Dad figured it was
good business. Said I spent too much time on the river anyhow; that I
ought to be out riding range for him.”

“Cowboy?” said Bob, at once interested by the two magic words “riding
range.” He had met them in many books of adventure. They brought up
thoughts of bucking bronchos, fights with Indians, and all the rest of
the romance of the West. That this boy of about his own age could be
a cowboy was really exciting. But he missed the woolly chaps and the
sombrero. The boy was simply dressed in overalls, went barefooted and
wore a heavy slouch hat.

“Nope,” said the other. “Dad don’t want me to be a cowboy. I wouldn’t
mind that much. He wants me to be a farm hand! Nix on that! I wish I
could go up to the dam. That’s regular work. Reckon I could get a job
up there?”

Bob did not know what to say. Mr. Whitney had given him the feeling
that for anyone who was really enthusiastic about the Service, the
Service had room. But he thought he had better not be too encouraging.
“Why don’t you come up and try? I’ll introduce you to the Boss.”

The other boy laughed. “My old man would whale the tar out of me if he
caught me monkeying around up there.”

“Doesn’t your father believe in the project?”

“He’s a cattleman,” said the boy, as if that explained everything.

“But what difference does that make?” insisted Bob. “He ought to be
glad to see the dam built!”

“You must be a tenderfoot,” the other said pityingly. “It’s this way.
My father raises cattle. For cattle, you need the range on which
they feed and which has been free to all. About all the range there
is around here is along the banks of the river. Now this irrigation
business comes along and the Government won’t let anybody have more
than 160 acres of land. Then my Dad has got to get rid of all his
cattle and go to farmin’--which is pretty nigh as disgraceful for a
cattleman as sheep-keeping. That is, of course, if he wants to stay
around this part of the country.”

“I see,” said Bob. “Then he’s got a real reason for not liking the
irrigating scheme. But you don’t seem to think the way he does about
it.”

“You bet I don’t train along with him. I’m so sick of cows that I never
want to see a long horn again. I’d like to be an engineer. I sneaked
up once or twice to the dam. It must be fun to help built it. But I
reckon it’s not for me.” The boys were silent, each busy with his own
thoughts. Then the newcomer exclaimed, “But here’s the place we want to
do some fishing. Grab a line and bait up!”

For several hours the boys fished with more or less success, and
during this time Bob learned a lot about his new friend. His name was
Ted Hoyt and he had never been farther away from home than Las Cruces.
He had had some schooling and the coming of the Reclamation Service
had fired him with an ambition to rise higher in the world than was
promised by the education he had received. The boys grew very chummy
and it was when they were eating their lunches that Bob finally made up
his mind to side actively with his new-found friend.

“I think it’s a rotten shame. I don’t think your father ought to stand
in the way of what you want to do.”

“I don’t reckon he ought myself,” was the laconic answer. “But he does
and that’s about all there’s to it as far as I can figure.”

“Don’t you think it might help if I got my boss, Mr. Whitney, to come
down and talk to him about it?”

“Gee whiz, no!” the other cried. “I reckon Dad would set the dogs on
the Chief Engineer from the dam. He hates him worse than poison.”

“But my boss has only been here two or three weeks. I don’t see how
your father has had time to quarrel with him.”

“That makes no never mind. The man he is laying for is the feller
bossing the dam. Dad don’t care if they change them every two days. He
can shift a grudge as fast as they can shift men!”

But when they finally parted they had come to the arrangement that Bob
was to keep his eyes open for a possible job for Ted. Ted on his side
promised that he would make one more effort to get his father to let
him do as he wished. They planned to meet the following Sunday at the
same place and compare notes.

Once back at the dam Bob took his share of the fish he had caught up to
Mr. Whitney’s cottage. “Brought you some fish, Chief,” he said. “But I
think I’ve hooked a much bigger fish. I met a young chap down the river
who seems to be the right stuff for the Service. He’s crazy about it.”

“I can always make use of a fellow like that,” said the Chief when
Bob had finished his story. “Tell him for me that he can have a job
whenever he can take it.”




CHAPTER XI

TROUBLE


But Bob didn’t have to go down the river to tell his new friend that
there was a job waiting for him whenever he chose to come and get it.
Ted showed up at camp one night just before quitting time. He was
waiting for Bob when the latter knocked off and had started homewards.

“Hello there,” said Bob. “What’re you doing up here?”

“I came up after that job we were talking about the other day.”

“Your father’s let you go?”

“Not so’s you could notice it. We had an awful fight to-day and I just
up and left. I couldn’t stand it any longer. Do you think there is a
chance of my hooking on? I’ve got to have it because I haven’t any
money to go any further hunting one.”

Then Bob told him the news that he had been saving for next Sunday.
“Come along to the Quarter-house with me and feed, and then we’ll go
hunt Whiskers--I mean Mr. Whitney.”

Ted was puzzled at the reference Bob had made to the Chief Engineer.
“You called him Whiskers--is that your nickname for him?”

“Not the one we use on this job,” laughed Bob. “We used that back in
Virginia.” And during supper Ted made Bob tell the adventures he had
had in Virginia with the man who was now in entire charge of the dam.

Mr. Whitney was as good as his word and gave the newcomer a chance to
make good as a rodman. Bob felt that because he had found him he was
a sort of protégé of his and they were together a good part of the
time. At first Jerry was one of their group. But little by little he
slipped back into the mood of silence and reserve which had been most
noticeable about him before the trip through the Labyrinth had been
made. Again he would go off by himself, seeming to prefer it to the
companionship of the other two boys. Bob noticed that very rarely did
he go down stream when he started off from the camp, but was headed in
the general direction of the north. Never since that first day had he
invited Bob to go along with him and after several of the trips he let
fall remarks about the Service and his job that did not ring true in
Bob’s ears. It was as if Jerry were nursing a grudge. But the fact that
the boy who had shared the great adventure of the Labyrinth with him
seemed to be growing away from him again, did not bother Bob as much as
it might have had he and Ted Hoyt not become such good friends.

On Sundays they went fishing together and spent most of the time
talking about the Service and their work. Ted soon grew to have the
same passion for the Service as had Bob. He was quick to learn and
together the boys pored over such text books as they could lay their
hands on.

The work on the dam had gone smoothly since Mr. Whitney had taken the
job over. Except for minor accidents, nothing really bothersome had
happened to delay the work in any way, yet Bob, who was now constantly
with the Chief, realized that something was bothering the man he was
so fond of. Gone was the half chummy, half paternal air of Mr. Whitney.
He was irritable and not at all himself.

Finally it got too much for Bob and one day, taking his courage in both
hands, he blurted forth, “Say, Whisk--Mr. Whitney, what’s gone wrong?
Is it anything money won’t cure?” He held his breath awaiting the
answer. It was a cheeky, nervy thing to do and if his boss did not take
it the right way, he would be perfectly justified in sending him back
to the horrible punishment of the draughting room. But he need not have
worried. Mr. Whitney was too much of a big boy himself and had too much
understanding not to realize that the question had been asked because
anything that troubled him meant so much to the boy.

“I guess I’ve been a bear lately, Bob,” he said laughing. “But I’m up
against an awfully queer proposition and I don’t yet see just how to
tackle it.”

Bob was about to ask another question, but thought better of it.

Evidently his keeping silence was wise, for a minute later Whitney
continued, “Although everything seems all right on the surface,
I’m afraid there’s going to be trouble with the Mexican laborers.
Somebody’s been tampering with them and the trouble down on the border
isn’t helping the situation any.”

“Gee, if the Greasers struck it would tie us up for fair,” broke in Bob
anxiously. “Except for the mechanics, and that bunch of Indians from
the reservation, they are about all we’ve got. We would have to shut
down, wouldn’t we?”

“I don’t reckon it would be as bad as that,” answered Whitney. “When
Uncle Sam once starts something, he is pretty likely to carry it
through. But we’d have a rough time of it all right. If I could
only find out who’s behind ’em--they are not capable of stirring
it up amongst themselves--I’d be able to nip the trouble before it
got started. If they do strike and we are delayed, the Water Users
Association will start on the rampage again.”

“Who are they and why should they be worried by what happens here?” Bob
wanted to know.

[Illustration: A bullet whistled by him. Then came another and another.
(Page 195.)]

“They are the farmers who expect to benefit by the water stored by
the dam,” explained the man. “They are the people who got together and
collectively pledged themselves to pay the Government a certain amount
of money each year until all the money the Government has spent is
returned. They firmly believe that the engineers in charge of the dam
take a malicious pleasure in delaying progress and that they try to
spend as much money as possible simply to make the farmers pay more in
the end. Naturally, as they make such a fuss, all the engineers know
that whenever trouble comes, they will be the first mourners.”

“Gee, that’s tough!” commented Bob, happy that Mr. Whitney had enough
confidence to tell him all these things. “But about the Mexicans; you
don’t suspect anyone around the job is the trouble maker, do you?”

“No.” The answer was final and assured. “But I wouldn’t put it beyond
a lot of the stock and cattlemen around here. They’ve been sore about
the dam, with as little reason as they have on every job the Service
has tackled. They always end by being a lot better off with the project
finished than they ever would have been if the range had been left
alone. At first they can’t help but suffer some annoyance from the
building of the dam. A good part of the land which we will irrigate,
while not sufficiently productive to be good farming land, raises
enough natural grass to feed stock. Above the dam the stored water will
form a lake that will cover thousands of acres of such pasturage, I’ll
admit. But the cattlemen are so blind that this point is all that they
can see. They will have the same chance to profit by the irrigated
lands below. It has always worked out well in the end.”

“I think it’s a rotten deal they’re handing you!” exploded the boy.

Big Chief Whitney laughed. “It would have come sooner or later, so
don’t worry your head about it. I’ve got to beat this some time and it
might as well be now. I’ll find a way. But don’t let this bother you,
kid. These are my exclusive troubles. Some day or other, if you stay
with the Service, I suppose you’ll be a Chief Engineer and then you’ll
have to worry over things like this. No use in borrowing trouble.” And
with this he closed the talk.

Bob could hardly wait until the quitting whistle blew. He wanted to
see Ted, and wanted to see him in a hurry. When he finally located the
other boy, he sketched out rapidly what Mr. Whitney had said.

“You’re with us--the Service, I mean--aren’t you?” finished Bob
seriously. “Even if it means going against what your father thinks is
best?”

“You can just bet your boots I am,” returned Ted, holding out his hand.
Bob shook it warmly.

“Well, then, I want you to help. The Chief needs to know who’s back of
the trouble and I believe you can find out!”

“Me?” the other boy echoed. “How? Shoot!”

“This is the plan. You go back home and say you are sick of
engineering--that riding range is good enough for you. If you do that
your father will be likely to take you back, won’t he?”

“Mebbe so. I dunno, but go on.”

“The Chief thinks the cattlemen are behind the trouble. I guess if you
get home and can mingle with ’em, you ought to find out what’s up.
Don’t you?”

“I get you. I can try it anyhow. But, Bob, I figger there’s a lot
in that trouble down at the border. Before I left home some broncho
busters happened in from Columbus and they said somethin’ was liable to
bust most any time. The Greasers are sore as pups since we sent a bunch
of troops down there. If some yellow half-breed could blow up what
we’ve got finished of the dam, wouldn’t it be a mighty fine feather to
stick in his sombrero?”

“P’r’aps that’s got something to do with it, but I’ve a hunch Mr.
Whitney’s right about those cattlemen. It’s up to you to find out.”

“I’ll hike up home to-morrow and see if the old man will let me stick
around. He was pretty much het up when I left. But, wait a minute. Are
we going to let Jerry in on this play?”

Bob hesitated for a perceptible interval before he answered. “I don’t
know. Somehow I don’t think we’d better,” he said at last. “Lately
I don’t know what has come over him. He never was very enthusiastic
about the Service but I thought he was really fond of Mr. Whitney. But
he’s let out some funny remarks and it might be possible that someone
has hurt his feelings. I’ve a sneaking notion that we ought not to tell
him. I don’t know why, but I just feel it.”

“You’ve got a hunch?” cried Ted. “Out West here we always play hunches.
Go to it; you’re probably right. By the way, don’t he go up the river a
lot?”

“He starts that way,” answered Bob. “And I remember a long time ago he
asked me to go up to some ranch with him. It just so happened that I
didn’t want to go. It was the day I met you, Ted.”

“Do you think--” began the other boy.

“I guess we haven’t got a right to think until we know for sure,
because if Jerry is in cahoots with the cattlemen, we’ll be on to it
before long. Oh, thunder, Ted, I just _don’t_ believe Jerry is mixed up
in anything wrong.”

“Then you’ll let him in on this?”

“I don’t know. I’ve got to think about it some more. P’r’aps I can get
him to explain. I’ll try to.”




CHAPTER XII

AT THE CABLE TOWER


Jerry did not come home that night and consequently Bob was not forced
to decide whether or not his room-mate was to be trusted. The next
morning Mr. Whitney mentioned that he had sent Mr. Rutherford and his
corps up the river to check up some topographical figures. They were to
be gone several days.

This would delay for a time the necessity of taking action in regard to
Jerry, and Bob was grateful for the leeway it gave him. Anything and
everything might happen in the spare time he was given. Perhaps all the
trouble would blow over. He certainly hoped so.

Ted Hoyt evidently had wasted no time in carrying out Bob’s plan, for
he did not show up at breakfast. His chances of success worried Bob all
morning and once or twice Mr. Whitney had to call him down for some
inattention to the business at hand. But when the day passed and Ted
had not returned, Bob was reasonably certain that the cattleman had not
refused to take in his son. That was a help.

Since becoming an aide to the Chief, Bob had not entirely given up his
unofficial inspection trips. The dam and all the operations that were
the building of it still fascinated him and his spare time was given to
roaming over the job. So good an observer was he, that time after time
he surprised Mr. Whitney with his knowledge of some obscure detail of
the work.

“How the dickens do you happen to know _that_?” he would exclaim.

“Happened to be over there the other night and used my eyes,” was the
usual reply of the boy.

There was a full moon the night following the day Ted had gone home
and Bob had taken advantage of it to go up to the west cableway tower,
from the foot of which he could see the whole work lying bathed in the
intense silver light. He wanted to think and he was always able to do
that better out of doors.

He did not feel he was doing his share towards clearing up the trouble
which threatened to break. Cudgel his brains as he would, there seemed
nothing for him to do. It had been his idea to send Ted off, but since
then he might just as well have been in Alaska for all the good he’d
been. For a long time he lay there, without finding a way out of his
difficulty.

At last he was about to get up and go home when he saw a figure dodging
from shadow to shadow and making up the hill in the general direction
of his position.

Glancing about him, Bob saw no way to get away from the tower without
being seen by the furtive newcomer. The moon was high and the ground at
the tower’s foot was clear of any cover. Something told him he wanted
to know what the approaching figure was up to and he would spoil any
chance of that if he disclosed his whereabouts. Happening to glance up
he saw that one side of the tower was in shadow. He crawled around to
it. Then he had an idea.

“Crazy lummox, why didn’t I think of this before,” he muttered to
himself as he began to climb up the tower. It was built of steel and
an iron ladder had been provided to make the oiling of the pulley wheel
at the top a simple task.

Hardly had he reached a height he felt was safe, when the figure glided
swiftly across the clearing and sat down almost in the spot he had just
quitted.

Bob was surprised when he saw the man roll a cigarette and coolly light
it. This display of unconcern as to whether or not he was observed, did
not fit in with the dodging tactics he had employed when coming up the
hill. Then the explanation came in a flash. Surely the spot had been
chosen on account of the clear space around it and the impossibility of
anyone’s coming upon it unobserved. The man had dodged on his way up
because he did not want to be recognized by a prowling night watchman.
Once he had arrived, no one could get near enough to be dangerous.

In the flare of the match Bob had recognized the newcomer. It was a
Mexican, Miguel Philipe, who was an underforeman at the trap rock
quarry.

But before Bob’s mind had accepted the fact that a Greaser was sitting
up here in the moonlight, instead of gambling or watching a cock fight
down in the Townsite, a crackling in the underbrush to the right caught
his attention. A moment later a figure stepped out into the clearing.
To his dismay, he recognized the approaching man.

Jerry King!

Jerry King, who was supposed to be up country on a map-making
expedition, was back and meeting a Mexican in a place that must have
been agreed upon before.

All the suspicions of Jerry’s attitude that he had fought down, came
back in a rush and were not lessened when he saw by the signs of
greeting displayed by Miguel, that Jerry was the person he expected to
see.

Bob’s perch on the tower was far from comfortable, so he hoped the
conference going on below him would last no great length of time. The
thin iron rungs of the ladder cut into his legs and his arms had begun
to ache from the strain of holding himself in place without making
any noise that would give him away. To add to his discomfort, he soon
realized that although he could overhear clearly every word that
passed between the figures on the ground it would do him no good, as
they were talking in Spanish, a language in which Bob remembered Jerry
could at least make himself understood. Since his arrival at the dam,
the Eastern boy had made some attempt to pick up a working knowledge
of it, but his time had been so short that he had not got very far.
Therefore, only a word here and there meant anything to him and as
these were simple words, they gave no clue to what was being discussed.

About all he could gather was from their actions. Jerry seemed to be
instructing the Mexican and emphasizing that certain things must be
done. Miguel at times grew excited and waved his hands frantically as a
torrent of words came from his lips. Finally, just as Bob was sure his
cramped muscles would force him to move his position, thereby giving
away his presence, they seemed to come to an agreement.

A moment later Jerry had slipped out of the open space into the
underbrush directly behind the side of the tower to which Bob was
clinging. For a long moment Bob held his breath, fearing that Jerry
might turn and see his dark form making an unaccustomed blot against
the iron work. But as the cracklings of the bushes died away, he
realized that Jerry’s one desire was to get as far away as possible in
the shortest space of time.

“He’ll have to hike some,” thought Bob, “if he’s going to get back to
Rutherford to-night.” Then he turned his attention to the Greaser, who
had not moved out of the sprawling position he was in. The ache in
Bob’s muscles became almost unbearable. When the Mexican rolled and lit
another cigarette as if he expected to stay where he was all night, he
was almost tempted to drop off the ladder and let the worst happen.

But this would not do except as a last resort, when all his will power
and determination had fled. With infinite care Bob shifted his position
a little and so gave his tortured muscles a slight rest. A few moments
later he was glad he had not given up to his fatigue, for Miguel arose
leisurely and sauntered down the hill, evidently not at all bothered
about being seen.

When he thought it was safe, Bob dropped off the ladder and for a
moment or so sat quietly, fully occupied in nursing his cramped limbs
back to some degree of usefulness. Then, having given the Mexican
plenty of time to reach the bottom of the hill, Bob followed, his mind
busy with the new angle of the situation chance had laid before him.

One thing was sure. After what he had seen he could no longer pretend
even to himself that Jerry was not mixed up somehow in what certainly
seemed to be a disgraceful business. He could put no other explanation
on it. Although it was hard to think that the boy who had shared the
adventure of the Labyrinth with him could be guilty of anything really
wrong, he realized the time had come when he could not let anything
but facts sway him. Jerry was on the other side without a doubt. Most
probably he was the connecting link between the cattlemen who wished to
stir up trouble for the dam by means of the Mexicans, and the leaders
of the Mexicans themselves.

But it puzzled him to know why Jerry could be a traitor to Mr. Whitney
and the Service. What was the inducement the cattlemen had offered him,
and what had happened on the job that had made him unhappy enough to
be unfaithful to it? There was no answer to these questions. He gave it
up as a bad job.

The next thing to decide was whether the time had come to tell Mr.
Whitney what he had learned. This was easy. He did not have a complete
case yet and would not until Ted came back with some sort of report.

The best thing for him to do was to learn as much as possible regarding
Miguel and to find out if he had been at all active in stirring up
discontent among his countrymen. Acting on this resolve, he made
guarded inquiries the next day of some of the men on the job who came
in contact with the gang of which Miguel was a sort of deputy foreman.

“He’s a bad egg,” was the comment of Tim Flannigan, the engineer of the
dinky that pulled the rock cars from the quarry to the crusher. “He’s
all the time startin’ somethin’ down to the Townsite. He’s got a game
cock that nobody kin lick, and the marshal has had him up several times
for gambling. Tried to run him out of camp a bit back but such a gang
of Greasers threatened to leave with him that Boss Adams, who was here
before Boss Whitney came, told the marshal to keep a close eye on him
and let it go at that.”

This information was valuable to Bob, especially the part about the
other Mexicans leaving if Miguel went. From this it was clear to see
that the man had influence among his countrymen and probably was just
the person to start trouble, if trouble was coming.

That night, in accordance with his plan to try to get as much as he
could of the general atmosphere of the situation, Bob decided to go
down to the lower camp. On the highest ground were the mechanics’
houses, and from them, sloping to the river bank, were the bunk houses
and shacks of the Mexican laborers. At one side, a little apart, was
the camp of the Indians who, aside from the Mexicans, were practically
the only laborers to be had in that section of the country. Of course,
they were far less in number than the Mexicans. The street on which the
motion picture theatre and the stores were located, was well lighted by
the power plant and had been dubbed “Broadway.”

Bob mingled with the crowd and finally drifted into the moving picture
show. His mind was busy with his problem and he did not pay as much
attention as usual to the scenes that were flashed before him on the
screen. He became aware, however, even in the dim light, that directly
in front of him sat an Indian, seemingly alone. A little to the left
were a crowd of Mexicans, who, from their boisterous behavior, seemed
to have been able to smuggle some whiskey into the camp, which, of
course, was absolutely forbidden on a Government job.

By some chance the next picture was a lurid western romance in which
Indians and cowboys were all jumbled together with furious riding and
rescues of the beautiful heroine. Of course, the Indians in the picture
were the villains. As the film unfolded the Mexicans grew more excited
over the story and Bob noticed that they began to throw slighting
remarks towards the Indian sitting directly in front of him.

Finally something was said which was more than the redman could stand.
He got up and in a dignified manner moved to the spot where his
tormentors were sitting. He spoke to them in Spanish.

A moment later the place was in an uproar. Fired by bad whiskey and the
knowledge that numbers were with them, the bunch of Mexicans had jumped
for the solitary figure.

Bob was on his feet in an instant and sprang for a Mexican who had
slipped into the aisle and was coming upon the Indian from behind. In
the dim light everything was confused, but Bob’s fist found its mark
and the man fell. The Indian was holding his own valiantly but Bob’s
help had come at the right moment. Together they backed towards the
door, fighting as they went. Then the lights went up and the Mexicans,
fearing the consequences of their action, slipped into the nearest
seats, hoping to escape notice.

When the fight ended in this fashion, the Indian drew himself up to his
full height and with a scornful look on his face turned and walked out
of the theatre. Bob followed and on the street found the man he had
helped waiting for him.

As he came up the Indian held out his hand and said gravely,
“Feather-in-the-Wind thanks you.” Without further word he marched off.

As he made his way back to the upper camp, Bob realized that in all
probability he had done a foolish thing to mix in on a quarrel between
the Mexicans and the Indians. That probably would mark him out among
the Mexicans as someone unfriendly to them and it might have been
better if he had stayed in the background. But the sight of the crowd
jumping on the solitary Indian had been too much for him.

When he reached his room he found the light on and Jerry about to slip
into his bunk.

“Hello, Bob,” was his greeting. “Just got back from up river.
Rutherford had me measuring the elevation of all the anthills from here
to Canada.”

Bob answered him rather curtly, amazed that Jerry could seem so
carefree when he must be concealing some terrible secret. It was
surprising that Jerry should be in such a good humor. He was much more
communicative than he had been for weeks.

“What’s your grouch?” Jerry asked, seemingly puzzled by Bob’s manner.
“Aren’t you going to welcome me home any better than that?”

“Oh, I’m tired,” returned Bob, “that’s all. I got into a sort of jam
in the lower camp to-night.” He decided it would be better not to
let Jerry know that he was at all suspicious, so in order to appear
natural, when the other boy wanted to know the details, he told him of
his share in the brawl at the theatre.

“Must have been fun,” was Jerry’s comment. “And if you’ve made a friend
of Feather-in-the-Wind, you ought to be proud. He’ll be useful, too, as
he’s the chief of that bunch of Apaches. Once an Indian is a friend,
you know, he’s a friend for good.”

As Bob tried to go to sleep his amazement that Jerry could be so
two-faced, grew more and more pronounced. Jerry did not exhibit any of
the symptoms of a person who was engaged in a treacherous plot, rather
he seemed happy and buoyant over the accomplishment of something well
worth while. Could he have been mistaken?




CHAPTER XIII

AN UNEXPECTED ALLY


The following night, just as Bob was about to turn in, Ted Hoyt knocked
at his door. Evidently Ted had come in a hurry, for he was covered with
dust and was breathing hard.

“You were right, Bob,” he panted. “The cattle bunch are behind any
trouble that might get unhitched. But come along with me and we’ll talk
as I start back. I’ll lose my pull with the old man if he catches on
that I’ve been away from the house. I had to slip out the window to get
up here as it is. The sooner I get back the less chance that he’ll get
wise!”

Once they were out of the house they started in the direction of the
Hoyt ranch. “Now, tell me about it,” urged Bob.

“Well,” Ted replied, “I hung around the house all day yesterday and
worked like a dog. Dad was tickled to death when I got back. Thought
that I’d proved by coming back that he was right. But he took good
care to give me a bunch of stiff jobs all the same. I didn’t get onto
anything yesterday until about ten o’clock. I had hit the hay but had
not gone to sleep, when Dave Wesley and John Harper rode in. Both of
’em are cattlemen and they were some lit up, believe me. They had been
down to Las Cruces and had mopped up all the liquor in sight. They had
been around the ranch a lot recently but I had not paid much attention
to them. When they came along before they had long confabs with Dad,
but took care to have them where they could not be overheard. Last
night they were not so careful and in spite of all my old man could do
they talked and talked loud. The booze made ’em careless, I reckon,
’cause I heard them all right.”

“What did they say?” asked Bob, quickly.

“A whole heap. It seems that the talk was in town that the lid was
going to blow off down at the border and that if they could get the
Greasers riled up on the dam, the trouble would not be laid to them but
simply on the general bad blood between the Mexicans and Americans.
Wesley and Harper were so enthusiastic they wanted to blow up the
spillway and the mixing plant. Even in their enthusiasm they realized
that the portion of the dam already built would be more than a job for
dynamite.”

“But what did your father say to all this?”

“Thank heaven, he wouldn’t stand for the rough stuff. He told them that
just out of sheer meanness he would not mind delaying things, but when
it came to blowing up Government stuff and laying it onto the Mexicans,
it looked too much like treachery for him. He was American--that the
plan did not seem like the American way of doing things. Gee, I was
proud of him. Finally the other two men started to raise thunder with
the old man and he kicked them out. That’s all. I reckon I found out
what you wanted, didn’t I?”

“You bet you did,” was Bob’s answer. “Good for you. I don’t think there
is any question but what the cattlemen are behind this.”

“I’m afraid you’re right,” was the other’s answer. “But I’m sure glad
my old man isn’t mixed up in it any more than he is. I s’pose you want
me to go back and stick around home? Don’t want to much--things are
more’n likely going to happen round here and I’d like to be on the job.”

“Yes,” said Bob, “I do. I don’t think you’ll have to stay there long
because if anything happens it’ll happen quick. After that I don’t
think even your dad will be against your doing what you want.”

“But what about Jerry?” asked Ted. “Has he come back?”

“He’s been back twice,” said Bob, “and I don’t know what to make of it.”

He told Ted of the happening at the foot of the cable tower.

“Don’t let him fool you,” said Ted when he had listened to the end of
the story. “Jerry’s mixed up in this as sure as shooting, and he’s
putting on that careless attitude just as a blind.”

“I’m afraid you’re right, Ted,” said Bob. “But I sure hate to think it.”

They had covered quite a lot of ground while talking and now Ted spoke.

“Don’t come any further. Beat it back. I reckon we’ve told each other
everything we know. Good night. I’ll come back again as soon as I hear
anything new.”

Bob started to retrace his steps but he had not gone far before he was
aware that soft footsteps were following him. He turned in his tracks
and stood still. A moment later the Indian he had befriended the night
before slipped up beside him.

“Feather-in-the-Wind is watching Boss Bob,” he said quietly. “Greasers
in show last night make big talk. Swear much. They hurt you because you
help me. When you go out I follow. Now I go home with you.”

Bob was overcome with astonishment. Not for a minute had he thought
that the episode of last night would have brought on him more than
the passing enmity of the Mexicans, but he realized that the Apache
probably knew what he was about. Then it came to him that if there
was bad blood between the Indians and Mexicans, in all probability
Feather-in-the-Wind would know if there was any trouble brewing amongst
the Mexicans themselves.

“It was good of you,” he said as gravely as the Indian had spoken. “But
you can help me further perhaps.”

Feather-in-the-Wind signified his willingness to do what he could by a
nod of his head.

“Your people and the Mexicans--they do not get along together?”

Again a nod.

“You like Big Boss Whitney?”

“Big Boss good to my people. Not let storekeeper cheat or Greaser
hurt,” was the answer.

“You want to help the Big Boss?”

Once more a gesture of assent.

“Listen. Big Boss thinks the Mexicans will start trouble. Does not know
what man is responsible--what man is saying big words and starting
trouble. You can help if you find out and tell me who the man is.”

“Yes, can do,” stated the Indian, and as they had approached the upper
camp during their talk, he made a swift move of the hand in farewell
and slipped swiftly into the shadows.

“Gee, but he went quick,” said Bob to himself, “and I wanted to put him
wise to Miguel! Well, he’s gone, so there’s no use bothering. Now to
tell Mr. Whitney the dope Ted brought!”

But when he came to it, the front of the Chief’s cottage was dark. A
ray of light came from the kitchen and Bob went to the back.

“Where’s the Boss?” he demanded of the Chinaman who served Mr. Whitney.
“Gone to bed?”

“Nope. Boss man he gone downside El Paso. Get little yellow tlicket,
gone off slam blang!”

From which Bob gathered that a telegram had called the boss from the
job and that it was his job to sit up alone with his troubles until the
Chief chose to come back.




CHAPTER XIV

THE UNMASKING OF JERRY


As far as the dam was concerned and the work going on there, things
were quiet for the next day or two. But the situation between the
United States and Mexico seemed to be growing more and more tense. From
the border came rumors of dissatisfaction caused by the presence of
American troops on patrol duty and the deportation of Mexicans from the
United States back into their country. As these reports multiplied they
furnished a topic of discussion for all. The American element feared
especially the effects any serious clash might have on the work at the
dam and openly discussed the possibility that an attack of some sort
might be made on the work itself.

Bob learned that the cattlemen were strongly in favor of having the
United States go into Mexico and stay there until things had been
settled for keeps. The most outspoken of the crowd wanted the United
States to conquer and then to annex Mexico, feeling that it was the
only way in which peace could be assured for any length of time. The
reason for their feeling was that the ranchers along the border were in
constant fear of cattle rustlers, who, once they were in Mexico with
their booty, were safe from pursuit. Under Diaz, who had ruled Mexico
firmly, there had been no great trouble. In those days raids were few
and they were quite as likely to have been made by American outlaws as
by Mexicans. Besides, Diaz would, wherever it was possible, aid in the
return of the stolen property. Since he had lost control things had
changed. The constant revolutions that came after him left the border
states without law and order. All sorts of robbery and murder were
permitted to go unpunished.

Even the builders of the dam often felt that intervention was the only
way out of a bad situation. Bob was sure that this unsettled condition
was responsible for Mr. Whitney’s being away from the work at a time
when matters were in such a ticklish condition.

Nothing new had developed in the plot which he felt was being
formed between the cattlemen and the Mexicans by means of Jerry.
Feather-in-the-Wind had not reported anything further. What worried Bob
most was his suspicions regarding Jerry King. Although he was sure that
Jerry was not doing what he should, he realized that all he had to go
on was circumstantial evidence. He had no real proof!

But he could not trust Jerry, and the feeling worried him. When Sunday
came around without the return of Mr. Whitney he determined to make a
last effort to find out just where Jerry stood. He did not dare risk
coming out into the open and asking Jerry what his suspicious movements
meant. If Jerry were guilty of wrong-doing, he would at once know that
Bob was onto something. In that case it was quite possible that Jerry
would fire the first gun before Bob was ready to combat it.

There was only one other thing which seemed practicable. Of course it
had in it a great element of chance as to his finding out anything of
value. But he determined to try it for want of anything better.

On Sunday morning he was up before his room-mate, and when the latter
came out the front door of the Quarter-house he was waiting for him.

“Going up river again to-day, Jerry?” asked Bob.

“Thought I would,” answered Jerry shortly, but halting.

“Think I’ll go along then,” stated Bob as casually as possible. “I’ve
never been up that way and I’d like to see the country that the lake
will cover.”

Jerry was taken aback and for a moment he hesitated before answering.

“Why--why you never wanted to go before and I--I don’t think I can take
you with me to-day.”

“I don’t care where you’re going,” said Bob laughing. “We’ll go
exploring, like we did at the Labyrinth.”

“But--but,” stammered Jerry, “I’m going to see somebody. They expect
me.”

“Oh, let them wait,” said Bob. “You can go next Sunday. We haven’t been
out together for a long time. Come on, be a sport.”

There was nothing to it. Evidently Jerry saw that Bob was determined to
go and he was afraid that if he refused it would look funny. Bob saw
the hesitancy and continued:

“Besides, I’d like to see a ranch. I’ve never been to one since we came
out here. The people you’re going to see won’t mind my coming along,
will they?”

Again Jerry hesitated and Bob realized that a struggle was going on
within him.

At last Jerry said with forced enthusiasm, “All right, old man, come
along. I reckon there’s another nag for you down at the stables. We’ll
go up to old man Holman’s ranch. He asked me to come up for dinner.
There’s always an extra place for anyone who stops by.”

Bob was rather elated that his plan had worked so far and they started
off mounted on a couple of bronchos that the stable in the lower camp
provided.

As they rode along Bob ignored Jerry’s evident irritation, knowing
that it was caused by his forced presence. He talked about a thousand
things. Jerry tried to answer in a light and casual manner but he made
a rather bad attempt at it.

The sun was hot as they rode and they kept close to the winding river
where there was some vegetation and a few trees that gave a little
shelter. After they had covered several miles they came upon crude
attempts at irrigation which extended the fertility of the land back
some distance from the river.

“These canals were started by the Indians,” said Jerry, “and were made
bigger and longer by the white settlers. When we get up to Holman’s
you’ll see some real irrigation.”

They did. Bob realized they were approaching the ranch by the sight of
broad green fields which were watered by orderly ditches and laterals
spreading out from the main canals like the branches of a tree. Here
and there were gates which could be used to direct the water down any
given canal or ditch.

“I thought Holman was a cattleman,” said Bob. “This looks as if he were
a farmer.”

“He is a cattleman, though,” was the answer. “The range is to the
north. A branch river flows into the Rio Grande and forms a triangle
of green grazing. Holman has put in this irrigation merely to grow
crops necessary for house use. It’s taken him years to make this place,
and the dam we’re building will wipe it out overnight.”

“That’s tough luck,” said Bob, thinking that if he sympathized Jerry
might let something fall which would be useful. But his ruse did not
work, for Jerry merely said:

“It is pretty hard, but when the dam is built there’ll be many other
fields below the dam. He’ll have to move down there, that’s all.”

There was very little more chance for conversation, as they were
rapidly approaching a low, adobe house surrounded by outbuildings which
were evidently stables and laborers’ houses. When they galloped in they
were hailed by a bunch of cowboys who were perched on the corral fence.
Jerry answered them with a shout and waved his hand but continued to
lead the way to the main building. On the porch two men were sitting in
chairs tilted up against the wall. Jerry introduced Bob to them.

“This is my friend, Bob Hazard, Mr. Holman,” he said. “Wanted to come
and see a ranch. He is a rodman down at the dam.”

“Glad to make your acquaintance,” said the man Jerry had addressed.

He was rather stout. Humorous eyes twinkled from under bushy brows.
“Glad to show ye what we got, though we ain’t goin’ to have it long if
you fellows keep on buildin’ that there dam. Meet up with my foreman,”
he said turning to the other man.

“Hello, Link,” said Jerry. “I didn’t bring Bob up only to show him the
ranch, but to let you give him a square meal for once. If you’ve still
got Sing Lee properly trained he’ll get it!”

The man Jerry had addressed as Link got up and gravely extended his
hand to Bob.

“I figure you won’t go away hungry,” he said in a voice Bob was
surprised to find was cultivated and soft. “The old man here sees to it
that we get enough. It won’t be long either. I’ll go and see. I’m sort
of housekeeper as well as foreman around this hang-out. Fine job for a
full-grown man.”

With that he disappeared into the house.

“Must be a big help to have Link around, isn’t it, Mr. Holman?” said
Jerry.

“You said something, my boy. The only trouble is I can’t _keep_ him
around. He’s been with me a dozen times but he always goes away again.
Sometimes he ups and leaves overnight and then I’m out a foreman. But
he knows he can always come back. When he is here he makes things hum.
Besides, he’s the only man who can make the Chink cook a good meal.”
Then he turned to Bob. “Soon’s we’ve had something to eat I’ll have one
of the boys show you around the place. You must be hungry after your
ride, ’specially if you’re not used to riding.”

Bob laughed, “We get enough to do week days on the dam to get up a
pretty good appetite. But I won’t deny that I’ll be ready when the
dinner bell rings. We’ve got a Mexican cook where we grub and he’s a
lot better on quantity than quality.”

“That’s right,” said the rancher; “Greasers are all like that. If
they start to rustle off some of our cattle they go in and take a big
bunch. Don’t seem to make much difference what sort they lift. They
just take the nearest to hand.” He grew serious. “I want to tell you
boys it’s getting bad. I had more cattle stole the last two year than
ever before. I wish the United States would make up its mind to go into
Mexico and clean out that bunch of thieves. It’s the only way we’ll
ever get any peace here on the border.”

Bob was interested in this view of the matter.

“Do you think that will help, sir?” he asked.

“I sure do. It’s disgraceful that we ain’t gone in there a’ready. The
Greasers are killing our people and doing everything they can to raise
trouble. Why I’d do almost anything myself to get things started down
there. I own a bunch of land there that I was planning to use when that
dam you’re a-buildin’ runs me out o’ here, but, shucks, it ain’t worth
a jitney to me now, an’ won’t be onless Uncle Sam gets a move on pretty
quick.”

“I think you’re right,” put in Jerry. “There ought to be nothing but
the United States between Canada and the Panama Canal. But I don’t
think we’ll go into Mexico unless the Mexicans raid our territory and
kill somebody.”

“If they did that,” exploded the rancher, “there’d be nothing to it. We
would be obliged to go in. I could come mighty nigh wishing somebody a
hurt if ’twould bring it about.”

Then before the conversation went further the foreman came out the
door. Bob noticed for the first time how powerful was the man’s build.
He was tall and rangy, yet he seemed to radiate power.

“Come on in, folks,” he said. “Sing Lee’s done himself proud.”

During the meal the conversation was without any special interest, but
afterwards, when Mr. Holman had retired for his siesta, Link O’Day
joined the boys on the porch. The talk drifted from cattle to farming
and from farming to forestry. On this topic the man spoke not only with
knowledge but with enthusiasm.

“It’s great stuff,” he stated. “Formerly the lumberman would go into a
forest and cut his lumber without any regard for the future. What he
did not use he would ruin. It was not until most of the harm was done
that the Government woke up to the fact that in a few years more there
would be no more timber worthy of the name.”

“Now it’s against the law to cut trees under a certain diameter, isn’t
it?” put in Jerry King. Bob saw the great interest that Jerry showed
in the subject and all during the conversation he felt that a close
attachment was being formed between Link O’Day and the boy. Probably
one of the chief attractions the ranch had held for Jerry before he had
become mixed up in the Mexican tangle was the relationship with this
man. While Bob was thinking these things O’Day had answered Jerry’s
question in the affirmative and had proceeded:

“Yes, but there is a lot more to forestry than that. I’d like to show
you some day how modern logging is done.”

“Sort of _gets_ me,” was Jerry’s enthusiastic comment. “Somehow the
thought of shady woods sounds mighty attractive after the dose of sun
and desert I’ve had the last couple of years. How about you, Bob?”

“Interesting all right, but I wouldn’t swap the Service for it by a
long shot!”

“You’re a Service bug,” smiled Jerry, who had lost all signs of being
uneasy. “I bet you’ll be an engineer all your life.”

“I hope so,” Bob answered. “Won’t you?”

“I don’t think so. There are a lot of other things I’d rather do if I
had the chance. Forestry’s one of ’em,” he finished with a smile at the
ranch foreman.

“If you still feel that way in the fall, I might take you along with me
when I drift out. I’ll be going up north then, I think.”

“Will you? That would be great!”

The man nodded and for a moment Bob was amazed at the look of
resemblance that was common to both. They might have been brothers or
father and son.

“We’ll talk more about it later,” was what he said. “Now, young Hazard,
if you want to see the ranch I’ll go along with you. Coming, Jerry?”

“No, Link, I guess not. I’ve seen it all and I think I’ll go down and
visit with the boys at the bunkhouse till you get back.”

Bob thought he detected a glance of understanding flash from one to
the other but put it down to his being suspicious of everything that
occurred. He accepted O’Day’s invitation and they moved off the veranda
in separate directions.

Bob instinctively liked the man who was showing him what had been done
to reclaim the desert. By the time they got back to the house they had
become good friends and the man had asked the boy to come up and visit
the ranch again.

They found Jerry at the bunkhouse sitting in a game of poker with four
or five of the cowboys. The players asked Bob to take a hand in the
game but he refused. He had never played cards for money and he never
intended to. Somehow, he was surprised that Jerry was playing; he had
never mentioned cards, but Bob had always felt that Jerry was not that
sort. He watched for a moment and saw that Jerry was evidently quite
far behind. He was flushed and nervous.

“Come on, Jerry,” Bob said; “let’s be getting back.”

“No,” snapped the other. “I’m not ready. Go along yourself if you’re in
such a hurry.” Then he went on with the game.

But before Bob left he heard a name which he recognized. Someone had
spoken to one of the players calling him “Harper.” He tried to think
where he had heard the name before. Then it came to him. Harper was
one of the men Ted Hoyt had told him about who had tried to make Ted’s
father join in the plot against the dam. Although Bob had started for
the door he stopped. Possibly the other man Wesley was here too. He
was, for a moment later Jerry said:

“I’ll call you, Wesley,” and shoved some chips to the center of the
table. The man addressed, a rather villainous looking person, smiled
and laid down his hand. Jerry did not smile. He threw his cards face
down on the table. He had lost.

Bob’s mind began to act quickly. The links of his chain of evidence
against Jerry were rapidly coming together. From Ted he had learned
that Wesley and Harper represented the most desperate faction of
the cattlemen; they were the spokesmen of the crowd that wanted the
Mexicans to do real damage to the dam. Here they were gambling with
Jerry and winning from him.

Wasn’t there a likelihood that they were doing this to get the boy
under some obligation to them? If so, it was a point against Jerry.
Then, Jerry was intimate with Miguel, who undoubtedly was the leader of
the dissatisfied and reckless element among the Mexican laborers. The
cattlemen had no way of getting in touch with the Mexicans at the dam
without being suspected of some treachery. Hence Jerry’s coming to them
might possibly have been a lucky thing from their standpoint. Still all
this was circumstantial and as yet Bob had no proof. But everything
that happened made him more and more suspicious of Jerry’s good faith.

At last he slipped out of the bunkhouse, went up and said good-bye to
his host and rode off in the direction of home. In all probability
Jerry would not come home until late.

Bob made his way back toward the dam slowly, his mind too busy with
the situation in which he found himself to pay much attention to
the beauties of the landscape. Before he had gone many miles he was
surprised to hear the sounds of galloping hoofs coming behind him.
His first thought was that Jerry had changed his mind and was going
to accompany him back to camp. But the noise was more than one horse
could make, so he was prepared to see strangers ride past him. He
turned in his saddle as the first horse came around the bend in the
trail.

It was Jerry, closely followed by the men he had identified as Wesley
and Harper! In a moment they caught up to him and stopped. But Jerry’s
first words were more surprising than his sudden appearance.

“What’d you sneak off for like that?” he said sneeringly. “Going back
to tell the boss you caught me gambling?”

Jerry’s two companions had reined up also and were waiting for the
answer. Bob quickly saw the object of this maneuver. After he had gone
one of them had suspected that his being at the ranch with Jerry was
not just an innocent visit. Probably they had struck on what was really
the truth of the matter--that Bob was suspicious in a general way of
Jerry and had taken a chance that he might learn something definite
if he came out and spent a day with him. Evidently Jerry had not been
able to make Wesley and Harper believe that Bob’s suspicions had been
quieted and they had insisted on following him on the pretext of
shutting him up about the poker business. This was to be used only as
a cloak under which to threaten him against telling anyone of _any_
suspicions he might have. They hoped in this way to frighten him into
silence.

But Bob would not be frightened. He realized that the time had come
when there could be no more fighting under cover. Throwing his head up
and looking Jerry in the eyes he said quietly,

“You know that I won’t tell Whitney about your poker playing. What I am
going to tell him is that you’re a traitor to the Service.”

Jerry quailed before the thrust. “What--what do you mean?” he stammered.

“Yes, what do you mean?” said one of the men threateningly.

“I mean that you and the cattlemen are planning to interfere and delay
the work of the Service! For the cattlemen it is only a crime. But for
you to help them, is treachery!”

As he spoke Bob did not flinch before the threatening attitude of the
two cowboys. “You little shrimp,” said Wesley. “I’ve got half a mind
to wring your neck and throw you in the bushes.”

Bob paid no attention to him. “Jerry,” he said, “is it true? If you
tell me now it isn’t I’ll believe that you just got mixed up in the
poker game and--and--Oh, Jerry, I can’t believe it. Please--please tell
me it isn’t true.”

For a moment Bob thought he had won, for there was a look in his former
chum’s eyes as if he was struggling to express something he could not
say aloud. But Jerry’s words belied the message of his eyes.

“Why--why of course not. Why of--of course it isn’t true. I--I don’t
know what you mean. I--I--”

From this hesitating manner Bob knew that Jerry was guilty.

“You are lying,” he said evenly. “Traitor!”




CHAPTER XV

THE CAPTURE OF BOB


“Traitor!” repeated Bob and then pulled his horse’s head around and
struck hard with his quirt. In a flash his little horse was flying in
the direction of home. It was a desperate chance he was taking, for
he had read in the faces of the two men as he turned that they were
determined that he should not get back to the dam with his suspicions
confirmed. He knew that in running he braved possible death, for he had
noticed that both men were armed. The sound of his horse’s hoofs and
the rushing wind drowned the noise that would have told him whether he
was being pursued or not. He was bending low in the saddle and it was
hard to turn and see what had become of Jerry and his companions. But
he managed it.

They were coming all right. But for the time he was holding his own and
even doing a little better. They had raced their horses from the ranch
in their endeavor to catch up with him, while he had only ambled along
over the same distance. He exulted as he realized the distance was
rapidly growing greater between them.

“Why don’t they shoot?” he thought. Hardly had the thought flashed
through his brain when a bullet whistled by him. Then came another and
another.

“Guess I’m too far,” he thought. “Out of range!” But he guessed wrong,
for a moment later his pony stumbled and fell. He rolled clear and
staggered to his feet and started to run on. But a moment later he was
jerked to earth. One of the men had roped him.

When his captors came up he realized that Jerry was not with them and
he turned to look back over the way they had come. No Jerry was in
sight. Evidently as soon as real trouble started the men had decided it
was better for Jerry to keep out of it.

“Thought you’d get away, did you?” said Wesley with an ugly laugh.
“Swell chance.”

Bob kept quiet. They tied his arms to his sides with the lasso and
then one of the men went over to the pony Bob had ridden and, putting
a revolver to its head, fired. Bob realized that no matter how mean a
citizen a cowboy might be, he would not let an animal suffer. The shot
which had dismounted him had hit the pony in one of the hind legs and
had broken it.

Little was said as they took Bob and hoisted him into the saddle of
one of their horses. Harper got up behind him and handled the reins on
either side of his body. He turned the horse’s head away from the trail
into the low brush that here covered the ground. The other man followed.

Bob was not gagged. Probably his captors were certain that no matter
how hard he yelled there would be no one near enough to hear. That
being the case, the boy decided that it was useless to wear out his
lungs. So he kept his tongue still and suffered in silence.

After the little procession had been going for some time, Harper began
to taunt Bob.

“You figgered you was goin’ to git clean away an’ dust it for the dam,
huh? Goin’ to tell ’em that we-uns up here was aimin’ to play thunder
with that ol’ bunch o’ masonry that’s a-goin’ to take the bread out o’
our mouths, huh?”

Bob paid no attention to this outburst, letting it go past his ears.
Wesley’s voice from behind took up the refrain.

“_And_, if it’ll do you any good, which it ain’t, you might know that
we are not only _aimin’_ to bust up that dam down yonder, but we’re
_goin’_ to do it, sure. It’ll all be over by the time you get back
there, though, so I reckon the information won’t help you much.”

They both laughed.

“This li’l’ rooster thinkin’ he could come along up this here way an’
fool us! But Jerry’s got the hand all dealt with Miguel. The Greasers
will turn the trick any night now. Then it’s good-bye ol’ dam for some
time.”

“Yep,” boasted Harper, “an’ mebbeso we can keep a-puttin’ it off
ontwell they git plum tired of tryin’ to buck us cowmen.”

“You can’t do it!” flared out Bob, unable to restrain himself any
longer. “The Service will beat you, and don’t you forget it!”

“Shut up!” roared Harper in his ear. “Children should be seen and not
heard!” And to emphasize his remark he fetched the boy a ringing clip
on the side of the head. Not having the use of his hands, Bob lost his
balance and fell out of the saddle.

A short dash for freedom was all he got, for Wesley on the other horse
caught him before he had gone many steps. This time they tied his feet
by means of a rope under the horse’s belly.

“Reckon you won’t try _that_ again,” grunted Harper when once again
they were proceeding towards what the boy imagined would be some sort
of prison.

His captors began talking about the situation at the Mexican border
and Bob drank in every word they said. It was just now that he began
to realize what depth of feeling there was about the way the situation
was being handled and to what lengths the ranchers and cattlemen would
go to force the United States to make war on the other country. Wesley
and Harper undoubtedly were “bad men,” but Bob was convinced by their
talk that they had started on this particular piece of villainy for
reasons which they thought were right. Probably when the thing began,
they never planned anything worse than a strike among the Mexicans in
order to delay for a year or two longer the flooding of the rangeland.
Then had come the chance to induce the Mexicans to commit worse crimes
in order to strengthen the feeling against Mexico and thus bring on
war. Holman, the boss of these men and Bob’s host, had said that he
wanted to move his stock to his ranch in Mexico when the dam was
finished--but it would be foolish to do that while the country was
still so unsettled. Presumably, there were a lot of men in the same fix
as Holman, and these, naturally, wanted the United States to step in
and make the unsettled country peaceful.

As he was revolving these things in his mind they came to an opening
in the thick brush. It lay right on the edge of the river, close to
which they had been traveling. Evidently it was the place that had been
decided upon as his prison, for, almost screened by the encroaching
scrub oaks, was an adobe hut. Bob could not imagine what it had been
used for. As they approached it in the gathering gloom of night, it
did not seem to have any opening except a door. No windows were visible
from the direction in which they came and Bob doubted if there were any
on the other side.

“I figger our bird will be pretty near safe in this li’l’ cage,” said
Dave Harper. “’Member when we holed up that hoss thief here?”

“Sure do,” was the answer. “’Specially safe as I elect myself a
c’mittee o’ one to stick here on guard.”

They unbound the boy and pulled him off the horse. They went rapidly
through his pockets and relieved him of everything they could find--his
watch, small change, and the jackknife he always carried. Then, before
he had a moment to limber up his cramped muscles, he was dumped
unceremoniously into the hut and the door was pulled to.

“It’s good we fixed up this door and put this bolt on,” Bob heard
Wesley remark as the bar fell into place. “Now both of us can go back
to the ranch so’s it won’t look suspicious. The kid is safe here till
doomsday.”

“Mebbeso, but I ain’t goin’ to take no chance on it! I’m goin’ to stay
right here till morning and then you can come down and do a spell o’
watchin’ too!”

Probably this last remark was meant only to impress him, Bob thought.
If the hut would hold him, Harper wouldn’t spend the night watching.
It would be too uncomfortable. Moreover, it would be all the same
if Harper was able to make his prisoner believe he would be outside
waiting for an attempt at escape. Once more he heard a voice. This time
it was directed at him. It was Harper.

“Listen, kid! Someone will let you out o’ there before you starve.
And I’ll be camped right here until the thing that’s goin’ to happen,
happens. You might jest as well make yourself at home and stop
worrying, ’cause it won’t get you nowheres. Good night and sweet
dreams!”

The murmur of voices came to him for a little and then all was still.




CHAPTER XVI

THE ESCAPE


Naturally, Bob’s first thought was of escape, of some way in which to
get out of the four walls which kept him from carrying the warning to
Mr. Whitney that might mean the saving of the dam. If he could only
get out, he did not fear Harper’s being on guard. The last speech that
had come to him through the door had been so contradictory and had
emphasized so strongly the fact that Harper _would_ be outside, that
Bob was quite sure he wouldn’t. At any rate he was willing to take the
chance if only he could get out.

The first thing was to examine his prison. There might be an opening
that had been overlooked. Bob started from the door and felt every inch
of the wall within his reach. His fingers had to do duty for his eyes,
as by this time night had fallen and the interior of the hut was pitch
dark. Not even a ray of moonlight came through the cracks in the door.
In this slow fashion he made the circuit of the room without finding
even a crack in the dried clay.

He was trapped!

But Bob refused to give up hope. Too much depended on his getting free
and being at the dam in time to prevent anything serious happening.
Back at the door, he threw his whole weight time and time again on the
boards but they held firm. This way, too, was closed to him.

What next? Feverishly he started to go through his pockets, hoping
that in their hurried search the cowmen had overlooked his jackknife.
If they had he could try to dig through the walls! Hope flared up for
a moment but soon died, as all he could find was a loose button and a
broken match that had lodged in the lining of his khaki jacket.

“Much good they’ll do me,” he muttered to himself and sat down with his
back to the door to plan some new attempt.

But at first all he could think of was what would happen if he did not
get out. Probably it meant the blowing up of the dam and machinery and
a serious uprising of the Mexicans--one that would mean bloodshed. It
was terrible to think of, yet he was convinced that that was the least
that could be expected. The cattlemen could not hold the Mexicans in
check once they had been started on the rampage.

Mr. Whitney knew that something was wrong, but he did not know what.
Bob’s confidence in his Chief was great but he feared that no matter
how strong and capable Mr. Whitney might be, he would be powerless to
avert the calamity that seemed on the way, unless he had some definite
notice that it was approaching.

Who else could help?

Feather-in-the-Wind! Perhaps the Indian would miss him and sound the
alarm? Besides, Bob had asked him to look out for trouble with the
Mexicans and perhaps, just perhaps, he might tell Mr. Whitney.

Then, as suddenly as the hope had come, it fled. Possibly Mr. Whitney
had not come back! Feather-in-the-Wind alone would be no use! He _must_
get out himself!

As he pondered his problem, his fingers had been playing with the loose
button that had been in his pocket, and now it slipped from his hand
and rolled off on the dirt floor toward the center of the room. Rather
aimlessly, he reached out and groped for it. As his hand swept the
floor it came in contact with a fine, floury substance. “Ashes,” was
his thought. An inch or so farther and he gripped an object that he
felt to be a half burned stick of wood.

Immediately the button was forgotten, for an idea had come to him. He
would burn down the door!

He had a match and if there was enough wood there was a chance. The
planking of the door was dry and there was no reason why it would not
catch.

The possibility of getting free intoxicated him and on hands and knees
he searched the floor. There were other sticks. Evidently the horse
thief had been given a fire and it had only been put out when he was
taken away for the last time--probably to the nearest tree high enough
to swing a man clear of the ground. Besides this, to Bob’s great
delight, a little pile of unburnt wood was stacked in one corner.
He wondered why he had not stumbled over them when he first made the
circuit of the hut.

Only when he had carried all his treasure to the door, did he realize
that in all probability his work had been in vain.

There was nothing to use as kindling! He had only one match and a
broken one at that. To make sure of his fire catching he ought to have
paper or some substance equally easy to light. The wood was dry but it
was too big to catch from one match.

Bob almost sobbed with his great disappointment. It seemed to be the
end; there was nothing more to be done. He had explored the room--every
nook and cranny of it--and he had come across nothing that could be
used.

But he made one more try. Possibly a picture or newspaper had been
tacked on the wall and had escaped his fingers when he had first gone
round the room.

There was no better luck this time and when he came again to the door
he was ready to admit defeat.

Then, in a flash, he knew he wasn’t beaten! Far from it. As he yanked
off his coat he muttered savagely to himself.

“You poor nut! You haven’t any sense anyway!”

After his coat, Bob ripped off his flannel shirt and tore it down a
seam. Then, with the greatest care, he began to unravel the threads
that made up the fabric. The loose threads would burn when the cloth
itself would only go out. Before he had a pile of threads that he felt
would be sufficient for his purpose, his fingers ached and his nails
were bleeding.

At last, however, he decided to take the chance of having enough. Going
over the stack of sticks, he selected the smallest and those that had
already been somewhat burned, as they would be the easiest to catch
fire again. Then he separated his flannel ravelings into three piles
and put them against the door.

Now came the crucial moment. He felt in the pocket where he thought he
had put the single match that might possibly be the key to his prison,
and for a second was sick with fear that he had lost it. But his
fingers closed on the precious object and he breathed again.

Holding it as if it were glass, Bob scratched it on the hard floor. It
did not light. Again he pulled it across the hard surface and a little
flare spurted from the head and then died out.

Bob gasped. He was sure that the match’s usefulness was over, but
feverishly, throwing caution to the winds, he rasped the head against
the planking of the door.

It lit, flashing a glare into his eyes so accustomed to the utter
darkness. But his gesture had been so violent that the stick broke and
the flaming head flew off and fell on the floor.

Bob grabbed it and, before it could go out, nursed the flicker in his
cupped hands, not realizing that it was burning his fingers cruelly.
Carefully, yet swiftly, he carried the flame to the little pile of
threads. As these caught, his heart grew light with thankfulness.

Little by little the boy fed the smoldering ravelings of his shirt with
the other piles, holding in the center of the glowing coal the smallest
of the sticks.

Hardly daring to breathe, he watched and hoped for a flame to spring
from the wood. If it came, he had won; if not, his losing was the end
of the fight. There would be no other way out.

Just as Bob was about to give up hope, for his fingers told him that
the last pile of threads was about all gone, a sliver of flame ran up
the stick he held in his left hand. It went out but a second later
another one came and stayed!

With the utmost caution, the boy laid the burning stick down on the
faintly red ashes of the threads and arranged other sticks on it. Then,
gently, he breathed over it and the little flame grew and multiplied.
Soon it was going briskly, but it was not till then that the load of
fear dropped from Bob’s shoulders.

When the fire was burning strongly, he moved it as close to the door as
possible so that the flames could lick the planking. His whole scheme
depended on the door burning sufficiently to let him either crawl
through or to weaken it to the point where his strength could break it
down. Therefore, once the fire was in place he must not be stingy with
his wood; the hotter the blaze, the more chance he had.

He piled on all the sticks he had and watched the flames mount higher
and higher until the whole doorway was a sheet of roaring fire.

He thought the door had caught but he could not be sure. But soon he
lost interest, for a new danger threatened him. It was one which he had
failed to foresee when he had planned this means of escape.

There was no outlet for the smoke! The little room was practically
air-tight except for the cracks around the door and these now were
bringing in only the oxygen that allowed the fire to burn.

Choked, stifling with the intense heat, Bob fell on his face,
remembering that smoke always rises.

For a moment or two this helped, for he was able to breathe, but soon
the smoke was everywhere and Bob knew that he would have to move.

Was he to die, trapped like a rat? Was this the end of his adventure?
It looked very much like it. But something would not let him give up.
He would make one more attempt for his life and liberty.

Struggling to his feet, his eyes almost blinded, smarting with the
sting of the smoke, he dashed headlong into the flaming door.

He bounced back, not knowing that his clothes were afire in several
places. Instinctively he charged again.

This time a crash, a splintering of the wood was the result. Once more
he dived into it and the next moment he was in the gray air of the
early dawn.

Stumbling, panting, he ran around the corner of the hut, urged by the
knowledge that he was afire. Luckily the river nearly touched the back
wall of the hut that had been his prison. A few steps and he fell face
downward in the shallows.




CHAPTER XVII

DYNAMITE!


In the cool water, Bob soon forgot his hurts. Coming out on the shore
he took stock of the damage that had been done. His hands were sore and
stinging sensations from different parts of his body told him that he
had not come off scot-free. Such clothes as he had on were ruined and
he knew that in all probability he was such a sight that his own father
would not have recognized him if they had met face to face.

Assured that he had suffered no damage that was really serious, Bob
gave some thought to other pressing matters. Since no one had appeared
after he had broken out of the hut, he must have been right when he
figured that Harper had had no intention of sticking around all night.

But because no one was around now, it did not mean that no one would
be. Probably the best plan would be to go and go quickly before either
Wesley or Harper decided to come down and bring their captive food and
water.

“Some surprise those chaps will get!” laughed Bob to himself as he
started down the river in the general direction of the dam. “I wonder
what they’ll do. Hit the high spots probably getting away from this
neck of the woods!”

It took longer to get back to camp than he had supposed, for he was
afraid to leave the river which served as his guide. Therefore it was
nearly noon when a bend of the river showed him the dam.

Fearing that his appearance would cause a sensation, Bob waded and
then swam across the shallow river and struck off to one side, meaning
to circle around to the upper camp. Then he could slip into the
Quarter-house by the back way.

This maneuver was executed without mishap and the only person who saw
him go in was the Mexican cook, who paid little attention.

“I guess he thinks the Gringo got mixed up with a charge of dynamite!”
was the boy’s reflection as he scuttled up to his room.

It was not long before he presented himself, washed and changed, at the
general offices. As he went in he asked the girl at the telephone if
Mr. Whitney had returned.

“Not yet,” was the crisp reply, “but Mr. Taylor wants to see you. Jerry
King didn’t show up to-day either and he’s worried.”

So Jerry had not come back. It did not surprise Bob much, but it meant
that Jerry had now openly allied himself with the other faction. The
fight was to be in the open, from now on. Coming back to himself, he
asked: “Where’s Mr. Taylor then?”

“In his office.”

He found Mr. Taylor busy over some blue prints. The engineer looked up
as he entered and Bob at once saw that the man was angry. His first
question proved it.

“What the dickens do you mean by not reporting this morning? Just
because Mr. Whitney is away, do you think you can take a vacation when
you feel like it? And King, too; wait till I get hold of him! But what
have you got to say for yourself, young man?”

“I couldn’t help it--”

“Couldn’t help it!” exploded the irate man. The total responsibility
for the project had fallen on him for the past few days and it had made
him nervous. “Of course you could help it. You’ve got to help it if you
belong to the Service!”

Bob waited until the storm had passed and then asked calmly:

“Has the Chief told you he suspects trouble with the Mexicans?”

The man looked at the boy sharply but made no reply. From his manner
Bob was sure that Mr. Taylor knew but did not wish to confess his
knowledge. Figuring that his silence was equal to an assent, Bob went
on:

“Mr. Whitney told me something about it and the reason I’m late to-day
is that I got mixed up in the mess--”

This startled Mr. Taylor.

“You--you’ve found out something?” he stammered eagerly.

“Yes,” answered Bob, “I have. I wanted to tell Mr. Whitney personally
about it but as things are likely to happen right off, I think we’d
better get busy without him.”

Rapidly Bob sketched out what he had learned during the past few days
and related briefly the adventure that had befallen him the day before.
As to Jerry’s part in the mix-up, he said as little as possible, but
of course it could not be entirely hushed up. As Bob was talking, Mr.
Taylor took the telephone receiver off the hook and called a number.

By the time his story was finished, a knock sounded on the door and it
opened to let in Jenkins, the camp marshal.

“I just telephoned the marshal to come up as we were talking,”
explained Mr. Taylor. “I want him to get those two cowboys if he can.”

“Won’t be much chance,” put in Bob, “if they’ve been to the hut. But if
they were going to leave me there without food or water, perhaps you
can get ’em.”

The engineer stated the case briefly so that the officer would
understand.

“I’ll try to git ’em,” announced Jenkins. “I guess I better git the
sheriff down to Las Cruces to call out a posse--”

“No, don’t do that,” put in Taylor. “This is a Federal job and we don’t
want the county in on it. Go to it alone.”

Stolidly the man took his orders and stumped out. When he was gone Mr.
Whitney’s assistant turned to Bob.

“What do you think will be the first move? Did you hear anything
definite?”

“No, sir, and I haven’t any idea what they’ll do. Anything is likely to
happen!”

“Then the only thing to do is to put on extra watchmen and keep a sharp
lookout for trouble among the Mexicans. I’ll see to it at once.” He
started up as if to go out. Then, remembering Bob, he said, “You’ve
done good work, Hazard. Sorry I was so grumpy when you came in. Take
the remainder of the day off and rest up.”

“Thank you, sir,” the boy answered, “but I couldn’t sleep now. There’s
too much excitement around!”

With this they left the office, Taylor to see that all preparations
were made to forestall any attack, and Bob to take up the work Mr.
Whitney had left for him to do.

The day and night passed quietly, but the next morning the mess room
of the Quarter-house was in a turmoil. News had come in that a gang of
Mexican bandits had made a raid on Columbus, killing and wounding many
Americans. This report was unconfirmed but rumors flew thick and fast.
Some had it that it was the army of Carranza and others that it was
merely an unorganized deed of a rash bandit. Most of the men thought it
was Villa.

When Bob heard the news he immediately connected Mr. Whitney’s
prolonged absence with it. The Chief was not back and in all
probability he had remained to talk over the best manner of protecting
Government property from any mishap. The raid was so daring that it
showed the possibility that others might follow and the dam was near
enough the border to be in actual danger. Bob realized that in all
probability this was just what the cattlemen wanted; that it might mean
intervention. Especially so if more outrages took place at once.

All during the day he worked with a cloud of apprehension hanging over
him. But nothing stirred. The Mexicans at the noon hour broke up into
groups and talked excitedly, but as far as Bob could see they did their
work without any friction with their bosses, and under Mr. Taylor’s
generalship the whole job moved smoothly.

But there was something wrong in the air. The very calm itself seemed
unhealthy, and Bob was glad when nighttime came. He noticed that Mr.
Taylor had again put on the extra force of watchmen, as he had planned,
all of whom were Americans. This had been done quietly and passed
without comment from the Mexicans.

However, just before the quitting whistle blew, Bob happened to be near
the spot where the Indians were excavating. He took this opportunity to
go up to Feather-in-the-Wind who was directing his men. Ostensibly he
asked something regarding the work but it was only to give the Indian
a chance to convey any message he might have. The Apache did have
something to say.

“Meet Feather-in-the-Wind by rock crusher to-night,” he whispered
swiftly, but cautiously.

It was sufficient. Bob walked off unconcernedly but as soon as dark had
fallen he went to the appointed place. He had not been there long when
the Indian glided up to him.

“Have you learned anything?” asked Bob quickly.

“Yes; Greasers much excited. One man make bad medicine. He Miguel. They
plan big strike--no more work. To-day came news much killing on border.
Miguel tell ’em Gringo all scared. They keep quiet, then capture dam.”

“Are they going to do what he says?” put in Bob in a tense whisper.

“Yes, Miguel very much strong. Greasers grumble but do what he say.”

But when Bob started to thank Feather-in-the-Wind for finding out what
he had, the Apache stopped him. “Wait! More!” he said. “One my young
men got keen eyes. Not dimmed by white man’s whiskey. He see Miguel
go away from camp one, two, t’ree nights. He take something with him.
Young man no follow. No worry him much. Perhaps go to-night. You want
us follow?”

“You’re whistling,” said Bob shortly.

Probably Feather-in-the-Wind did not understand the slang but he got
what Bob meant, for he said, “Come!” and started off in the direction
of the lower camp. He did not go through the village but cut up on
the hillside, walking swiftly as if he knew where he was bound. Bob
followed.

A few minutes later a slim shadow rose out of the chaparral.
Feather-in-the-Wind spoke in his own language to this newcomer.
Evidently this was the brave who had kept note of Miguel’s comings and
goings. The conference over, Bob’s friend uttered the one word, “Wait!”
and sat down. The other Indian slipped away. Bob followed the example
of Feather-in-the-Wind.

From where they were sitting, screened by the undergrowth, they could
see a section of a rough path that led up the hillside. For a long
time nothing happened. As the Indian did not speak, Bob felt it best
to remain quiet also. Probably there was a reason for it. The delay
did not worry him much, however, as there was plenty of material for
his mind to be busy with. Ever since he had talked with Mr. Whitney,
events had tumbled upon him one after another. Mr. Whitney had gone
and Ted was doing outpost duty. Jerry was on the other side. Only the
Indian was left to him and he was not much of a counselor. True, he was
beginning to prove himself a great help but through the limitations
of language he could not be used to discuss what ought to be done
regarding the things they found out. What the outcome of the mess was
to be was beyond Bob’s imagination to foresee. He was determined to
do what he felt was his duty, and if the consequences were serious it
could not be helped.

His reverie was broken by a nudge on the arm. He looked up to see a
shadow darting along the path. Nearer and nearer it came until it
passed almost close enough to the point where they were sitting to be
touched by Bob’s hand should he thrust it from cover.

The young Indian had been right. It was Miguel. Even in the uncertain
light Bob could see that he carried a queer-shaped package under his
arm.

A moment or so later the Indian got up and motioned to Bob that it
would be safe to follow. They did not take the path but threaded their
way amongst the underbrush, the sand deadening their footsteps. So
cleverly did the Indian pick his way that hardly a sound was made by
their coming in contact with the bushes. Bob had difficulty in keeping
up with his guide, yet he did his best and when they reached the crest
of the hill he was but a few steps behind.

Once here, the Indian stopped and took an observation. An almost
imperceptible grunt escaped him and, turning on his heel, he motioned
Bob to follow. It was a surprising move, for the Indian practically
retraced the steps they had just taken. Bob was soon to know the
reason, however, for halfway down the hill the Indian spoke, not
turning his head.

“Fool Greaser! Go all way up hill only to throw people off track. I
know where he make for. Come!”

Bob was breathing hard when they finally reached the spot where the
Indian decided to stop. It was above the dam proper and on the same
side of the river. Again they established a hiding place in the
underbrush but this time it was near the edge of the clearing. Below
them was a widening of the river where the coffer dam had been built.
This was erected to divert the water of the river into the spillway,
which left the river bed dry for the construction of the main dam.

“Why do you think he will come here?” asked Bob, amazed at the Indian’s
tactics. He didn’t for a moment doubt that Feather-in-the-Wind knew
what he was about, yet it surprised him and he wanted an explanation.

“Easy,” said the Indian. “Only two places go when get top of hill. One
way lead to station, other way to upper camp. He start direction upper
camp. I know he no go there. Therefore he go round and come back to
dam. Nearest place him come back.”

It was easy once it was explained, Bob realized, and the words brought
a complete faith in his guide’s methods.

Again silence was necessary, for if Miguel was coming it would not be
long before his arrival. Come he did and only a few yards from them.
Bob held his breath until Miguel passed them and reached the river
level. There he put down his package, which Bob noticed he handled
with the utmost care. But this did not impress the boy as much as did
the next move of the man under observation. Going up to a rock which
showed itself above the ground, he knelt and began scooping away the
sand from one side of it. After a few moments of this work he evidently
found what he had been digging for, because he picked some objects out
of the hole he had made and laid them at his side.

Involuntarily Bob gasped. He recognized what it was that Miguel had
taken from the hole and what probably was also in the odd-shaped
package he had been carrying.

It was dynamite, dynamite stolen probably from the work and brought up
and stored here for some evil purpose. Evidently Miguel was preparing
to strike the first blow in the plot against the dam.

Bob kept still, feeling that he would soon know what Miguel planned to
do with the explosive, for if whatever plan the Mexican had conceived
was not to be consummated to-night, it was evident that he would have
buried the additional stuff he had brought instead of digging up his
cache.

In this he was not mistaken. Miguel produced from around his body a
coil of fuse and began joining the sticks of dynamite and placing
detonating caps in them. Every muscle in the boy’s body ached to jump
from the hiding place and grapple with the man who was arranging such
wholesale destruction, but evidently the Indian realized what was going
on within him, for he felt a restraining touch on his arm. At once he
knew what it meant. The Indian was telling him that it would be foolish
to attack the Mexican when he had so much sudden death in his hands.
Before they could reach him, no matter how swiftly they acted, the
Mexican could throw the dynamite and the damage would be done. There
was nothing to do but wait and hope that Miguel would give them an
opening when there was more possibility of averting the catastrophe.

The Mexican worked swiftly and at last he had his infernal machine
ready. Straightening up, he carried it to the coffer dam and began
laying the dynamite sticks at equal intervals along the bank. This
dam was constructed of timber backed up by refuse material from the
crusher and the excavation. It was neither high nor wide at this time
as it only served to divert the ordinary flow of the Rio Grande. It
had not been destined to cope with any flood, should one come, as the
engineering plan was to get the dam in such shape as to withstand a
freshet before the rainy season came on. But the dynamite the Mexican
was laying was sufficient to wreck what had been built, and, should the
water be released, it would undo thousands of dollars worth of work at
the main dam, besides the delay caused by the rebuilding.

It _was_ the first blow in the Mexican campaign and at all hazards it
must be stopped. Bob knew this and the Indian at his side knew it.
Miguel went farther and farther from them towards the center of the
river. They could follow him with their eyes as his movements were
clearly outlined in the white moonlight. There was no watchman on the
coffer dam. There seemed no reason for one; yet Bob realized that a
watchman was needed everywhere with this plot seething.

It was a horrible situation, for there seemed to be nothing that could
be done. Probably the Mexican was desperate enough to sacrifice his
life if he should be detected while laying his mine. He would set off
the dynamite if he saw anything to disturb him. Therefore, to attack
him openly seemed out of the question.

What was to be done? There seemed no answer. At last an idea came to
Bob. “Go quick,” he said to the Indian, “get help! Bring a gun. Perhaps
we can shoot him! I’ll stay here and watch. You can go quicker than I.
Hurry!”

Feather-in-the-Wind knew it to be the only plan and started off with
long running leaps, keeping himself well hidden from the Mexican. There
was just a chance that he could get to the camp and back before Miguel
could complete his dastardly work.

As soon as the Indian was gone Bob started to carry out a plan of his
own. He knew the Indian would not have allowed him to take the chance,
so he had been forced to use a stratagem to get Feather-in-the-Wind out
of the way.

Kicking off his shoes, he wormed his way on his stomach towards the
upper side of the coffer dam. Miguel was working on the lower side and
Bob knew that the dam was sufficiently high to keep his actions hidden
from the Mexican.

When he reached the edge of the river Bob slipped into the water with
as little noise as possible. Keeping close to the dam he found that
he could make fair headway by half swimming and half walking along
the slanting boards which held the Rio Grande in check. His plan was
desperate, yet it was the only one that seemed feasible. Miguel would
probably set a rather long fuse, one long enough to allow him to get
safely away. “If I can only get there before the fuse has burned to the
first stick of dynamite!” gasped Bob to himself.

Panting, struggling, gasping, he fought on. His mind was filled with
the horror of what would happen should he be too late. There was no way
of telling how far Miguel had gone. The dam that kept him hidden from
the Mexican, also hid the Mexican from him. He must--he _must_ go on
until he was well past the center of the dam--Miguel would do the job
thoroughly if at all. Once there he must go through a fresh ordeal. He
must climb out of the water and look over the edge of the dam in order
to get his bearings and to find out where the Mexican had lit the fuse.
Should he look over at the wrong spot and Miguel see him, it was the
end--the end probably of his life and surely the finish of the coffer
dam.

At last he passed the sluice gates which marked the center of the dam.
A few rods further on he knew he must climb up and look over.

There was no time in which to gather his nerves together. He must
act and act at once. So, pulling himself up with as little noise as
possible, he peered over. No Miguel was in sight. But a hundred feet
down the dam was a tiny thread of white smoke shining gray in the
moonlight. With a despairing sob he leaped towards it as fast as his
soaked clothes would let him.

[Illustration: Under his feet he saw the snake-like line of fuse. With
a leap he pulled the whole thing over the bank.]

Zing! A sharp report and a whistle through the air by his ear told him
that Miguel had caught sight of him and hoped to stop him by means of
a bullet. But Bob had to go on. Again came a shot, but this time
farther from him. “Rotten shooting!” panted Bob for the wind to hear.
Now he was almost at his goal. He saw that there was still a length
of fuse to be burned before it got to the explosive but the smoke was
moving rapidly towards him. Another bullet came. He would not have time
to get to the end of the fuse before it exploded. Despairing, he was
almost ready to give up.

Then under his feet he saw the snake-like line of fuse. Reaching down,
he grabbed it. It was necessary to take the chance that this sudden
disturbance of the dynamite might set it off. With a leap, he pulled
the whole thing over the bank with him and dropped with it into the
water of the Rio Grande. He did not hear the sizzling sound that
told that the fuse was dead. As he sank into the water, Bob was only
conscious that he had done his best.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE RAIDERS RAIDED


When he came to the surface, Bob’s first sensation was one of extreme
weariness. So spent was he that it was all he could do to keep himself
afloat. The possibility of another shot from Miguel did not spur him to
dodging in the water. If the shot was to come, it would. Bob knew that
he was alive, therefore the danger which threatened the dam was over.
This being the case, a great contentment came to him--what could happen
to him now mattered very little.

But as the minutes passed he got back his grasp on things and realized
that no more shots were coming. Evidently the Mexican had become
frightened and had run. The next thing he knew was that he was being
pulled out of the water by Feather-in-the-Wind.

“Hurt?” said the Indian.

“No,” Bob gasped. “Mig--Miguel got away!”

The redskin did not seem to bother about the Mexican’s escape. From the
gentle way in which he handled the boy, it was clear that he was proud
of him, proud that the young white man had done such a brave deed. He
had seen what had happened as he came running back from the camp.

“No matter,” he said. “You save dam. I see. Good work.”

The praise acted like a tonic on the weary boy. He stood up.

“We’d better hurry back,” he said, “and send someone after the Greaser.
He’s dangerous.” And without further words the two set forth.

Under the moon the town lay quiet, only a lighted window here and there
to tell that it was inhabited. Around the machinery and on the dam
itself tiny shadows moved to show that the watchmen were not sleeping.
Just before they reached the Quarter-house, a horse and rider galloped
up the hill. Bob recognized Jenkins and stopped him.

“Did you get your men?”

“They dusted ’fore I got there,” was the disgusted answer. “I trailed
’em down stream but I reckon they’ve hit the border by now.”

“Sorry,” sympathized Bob, “but I guess they found I’d got out and that
scared ’em.”

“I reckon so, ’cause they had too good a start for me to catch up with
’em. Good night to ye,” he finished and galloped off to put his tired
horse away and get some much-needed rest for himself.

“Too bad,” grunted the Indian as they walked on. “But you no tell him
’bout Miguel. Why not?”

“I think I’d better report to Big Boss first. Perhaps he will have some
other plan.”

“Boss Whitney not here,” stated the Indian. “Boss Taylor good man but
not like Chief. You wait for him. Now I go send one, two my young men
trail Miguel. Perhaps they catch him--Jenkins, he never catch him. He
tired. Not much good trail nohow.”

This sounded like good advice to Bob.

“Go ahead,” he said. “I’d like to see Miguel well punished.”

The Indian stalked swiftly away and Bob turned towards his boarding
house and sleep. It seemed a safe bet that there would be no further
trouble that night. In all probability if an uprising amongst the
Mexican laborers had been planned it would not come off to-night. Bob
was sure that the blowing up of the dam would have been the signal for
the starting of general hostilities. Since he had been able to prevent
the signal being given, and at the same time had scared Miguel off, the
chances were that all would remain quiet. Leaderless, the Mexicans were
harmless, and Bob had a hunch that Miguel was the only one of them who
was strong enough to direct the revolt.

But a surprise awaited him when he pushed open the door of his room.
Seated on the bed was Ted Hoyt, who showed signs of having anxiously
awaited him.

“At last! I thought you’d never show up.”

“What’s the rush?” asked Bob. “Found out something?”

“You bet I have. A whole heap. Bet it’ll make your hair curl--”

“Come on, Ted, old scout, out with it,” Bob urged the excited boy.
“You haven’t said anything yet. You’ve tuned up, now play something!”

“I--I think a bunch of Greasers are goin’ to raid the dam!”

“What?” Bob exploded. “Mexicans from the other side of the border?”

“Yes, I think so. Reg’lar bandits--about fifty of ’em.”

“How do you know?”

“I saw ’em. Dad sent me out ’bout sundown to hunt a stray calf and I
saw some smoke coming from a draw where nobody had any business being.
I hitched my nag and crawled up until I could see.”

“And what did you see?”

“A bunch of armed Mexicans! They had camped for supper. I figgered that
they were coming on up here to-night, so I beat it straight for you.
Bet Dad’s got a search party out huntin’ me right now!”

“Gee whiz, but we’ll have to get busy in a hurry,” snapped Bob. “Come
on, we’ll wake Mr. Taylor.”

He had turned towards the door as he was speaking and the words died
in his throat as the door flew open and a dusty form stepped into the
lighted room.

It was Jerry King!

“You?” gasped Bob. “You? What are you doing here? To tell us that the
dirty work you started is successful?”

The boy stood straight under the taunts his former friend heaped upon
him. A little smile was at the corner of his mouth as he answered.

“You haven’t much faith in me, have you? You are quite ready to believe
that I have been a traitor to the Service.”

“But--but you are!” stammered Bob, taken aback for a moment by Jerry’s
words. “Didn’t you admit it--”

“Whatever I am, we haven’t got time to gas about it now. I came to--”

“I don’t care what you came for,” flashed Bob. “Don’t try to sell
out the other side now! It’s bad enough as it is without your
double-crossing your new friends!”

For a long moment both boys eyed each other without flinching. Then in
a flash Bob’s anger fled and he thought clearly. Jerry must not be
let out to do more damage. He was too dangerous. He must be caught and
put away until the crisis was over. No sooner had the thought flashed
through his mind than he acted. Jerry was nearest the door, which was
still open, so a leaping tackle was the only thing that would work.

Bob dived at his former chum with all his force. They grappled.

“At him, Ted! We’ve got to keep him!” he panted as he struggled with
his adversary.

Ted was so amazed by the sudden happening that he could not make his
muscles respond to the call immediately. When he did get started it
was too late, for Jerry had got an arm free and had swung his fist to
Bob’s jaw. The blow, while it did not knock the Eastern boy out, was
sufficient to loosen his grasp and Jerry jerked away and flashed out of
the room.

Ted went after him on a run but again he was too late, for when he
reached the threshhold of the house, his quarry had disappeared.
Dashing back through the hall, he met Bob on his way out, and they went
to the door.

“Lost him,” reported Ted. “Clumsy fool I am!”

“Don’t worry,” returned Bob. “I ought to have been able to hold him.
I’m only worried about what he might do now. I’m going to wake Mr.
Taylor.”

“No good do that,” a quiet voice came to them from right beside them in
the shadow of the doorway.

“Feather-in-the-Wind!” gasped Bob. “You back?”

“I go myself trail Miguel. I catch his track and run swiftly. Big moon
help much. Pretty soon I see little light just below big dam in bushes.”

“Was it--was it some strange Mexicans?” asked Ted excitedly.

“Yes. All got guns. Horses too. Bad men.”

“Your bandits!” whispered Bob to Ted. The other boy nodded an assent.
“Go on,” he urged the Indian.

“I crawl up. Much big talk. Miguel talk much. Think want Greasers start
trouble. Greaser leader say no start trouble till Miguel get Greasers
here start trouble too. Pretty soon Miguel he start back towards camp.
But much afraid you tell ’bout dynamite dam and people watch for him.
He go slow. I run behind. Catch--”

“You killed him?”

The Indian came as near to chuckling as he was able.

“No kill. Tie, gag, throw in bushes. Him no more trouble to-night. Then
come here get you.”

“Fine work!” was Bob’s comment. “Gives us time to turn around.” Then he
suddenly remembered that the Indian had started the talk by advising
against bringing Mr. Taylor into the emergency. “But why not get Boss
Taylor?”

“No use. He just rouse camp. Everything mixed up. Got better plan.”

“What is it?” urged the boys.

“Plenty young men my tribe. Got five--six guns. Plenty make much noise.”

“I see,” cried Bob joyously. “We’ll take ’em and surround the Greasers.
Then shoot off the guns and scare ’em off! That it?”

The Indian grunted and without a word led the way towards his camp.
Bob rushed back to the house and caught up a revolver that he had
bought to take care of any snakes that he might meet on his jaunts away
from the dam. He did not catch up with Feather-in-the-Wind and Ted
until they had reached the Indian encampment. The redskin was already
rousing the braves he had picked to take part in the adventure, and
there was nothing for the boys to do until all the arrangements had
been made.

Bob wondered what had become of Jerry. Could he have gone to warn the
bandits? It seemed the most likely thing, yet there was just a chance
that as the plot had become so mixed up by Miguel’s failure to pull
off the mining of the coffer dam, that Jerry would be busy in another
direction. He might have decided to go and tell the cattlemen that
a serious hitch had occurred. It was all very puzzling, especially
Jerry’s sudden appearance in their room.

This started a new train of thought. Why had Jerry been foolish enough
to show himself in the Quarter-house? Nothing could be gained by it.
Could it be that he had come to warn Bob of the impending danger
to the dam and consequently to himself? Perhaps the memory of the
dangers they had shared and overcome in the Labyrinth had stirred him
to a moment of remorse and a desire to see his chum safe. This seemed
the most likely explanation but further thought was impossible, for
Feather-in-the-Wind was ready to start.

The Apache chief had sent his braves ahead, telling them to go
separately to the point he mentioned and not to do more until he gave
the signal. Therefore, only the two boys were left to go with him.

“Let’s go down by the Mexican bunkhouses and see if anything is
stirring there,” suggested Ted Hoyt. “It’s on our way and just the
three of us won’t attract much attention.”

They picked their way through the sleeping village, which was now dark
as the moon had long since finished its journey across the sky. All
seemed quiet in the Mexican houses, but when they got up close a figure
slipped from a shadow and challenged them.

“No further this way!” the order came in quiet yet determined English.
Bob recognized in the speaker one of the extra watchmen Boss Taylor
had put on.

“Right,” answered the boy and the trio moved on, only to be stopped
again a hundred feet further on and the same order passed.

“Gee whiz!” Bob exclaimed. “Guess Taylor has gotten wise and stuck a
bunch around here to sit on the Mexicans if they start anything. Didn’t
think he had it in him!”

“That will help us a heap,” was Ted’s idea. “We won’t have to worry
about their taking a hand in our game!”

Feather-in-the-Wind only grunted and led the way swiftly towards the
place where he had come on the Mexican bandits. The dark seemed to
bother him little, if at all, for he walked with long strides, missing
obstructions as if by intuition. The boys had difficulty in keeping up
with him and it was a relief to them when he finally slowed down and
stopped. Telling them by gestures to use the greatest caution against
making a noise, on he went, the boys following.

They had crossed the river and were going down stream. Here there was a
gentle rise in the ground. About halfway to the top of this hill the
Indian motioned them to stay where they were and then, taking their
obedience for granted, dropped on hands and knees and started to crawl
rapidly the remainder of the way.

The excitement was too much for Bob. To stay still while serious events
might be happening was not what he had bargained for and as soon as
Feather-in-the-Wind was out of sight in the underbrush, he too started
off, using the same manner of locomotion.

So cleverly had Feather-in-the-Wind secreted himself at the top of the
rise that Bob was about to crawl over him, thinking it was a fallen log
that obstructed his path. Stifling an exclamation, he lay still. The
Indian did not show any signs of annoyance that his orders had been
disobeyed and when he started to wriggle into a position from which he
could see the other side of the hill, by a move of the hand he invited
the boy to follow.

At first glance there seemed nothing amiss. To Bob’s untrained eye, the
shadows that lay heavily in the dark of the night were only scrub pine
and underbrush. But as he looked these shadows took form and substance.
They were men, sitting or lying relaxed, in attitudes of waiting. A
faint nicker and trampling of hoofs told that horses were hobbled in
the vicinity.

Bob heard a crunching noise behind him and turned his head to find that
Ted Hoyt too had been unable to stand the strain of waiting uncertain
as to what was happening to his friends.

Suddenly the still and silent air was rent by a noise that has no equal
in the world. It was the blood-curdling war whoop of an Indian. Coming
so close to their ears, although they had been expecting it, the boys
nearly jumped out of their skins with terror.

Feather-in-the-Wind had given the signal to his men. A moment later
answering whoops seemed to come from all parts of the compass and these
were emphasized by a rattle of rifle shots.

Bob jumped to his feet and began pulling the trigger of his revolver as
fast as his fingers would work. Then, yelling, he followed Ted and the
Apache in the rush down the hillside.

The Mexicans, surprised by the suddenness of the attack, did not wait
to fire many shots in return. A mad scramble for their horses was
taking place and dimly Bob saw the outlines of the marauders string out
at a mad gallop.

When on a dead run he reached the foot of the hill, all the Mexicans
had gone, fleeing from what they supposed was a trap.

Feather-in-the-Wind had become separated from them, but his plan had
worked! This was Bob’s first thought, but his exultation was cut short
by the most surprising event of this eventful night!

The clear notes of a bugle rang forth in the thrilling signal to
charge!




CHAPTER XIX

JERRY COMES BACK


“What’s that?” cried Ted Hoyt, stopping in his stride.

“Blest if I know,” panted Bob. “But come on, we can see from the hill
over there!” and with this he started off again. When they reached the
place Bob had thought would be a point of vantage, the mystery was
explained.

“Soldiers!” Bob gasped as the outlines of the men grew clear against
the star-lit sky as they topped a near-by ridge. “Cavalry!”

“You sure?” demanded Ted. “I wonder how in thunder they drifted into
this here party. I figgered it was all ours.”

“I don’t know, but I am sure glad they’re here. Maybe they’ll catch
those devils and then we won’t ever have any more trouble with ’em.
But--listen!”

From a distance came the rattle of gunshots.

“The Greasers making a stand, I reckon,” was Ted Hoyt’s comment.
“Probably a regular battle.”

Bob was about to reply when an interruption stopped the words that were
on the end of his tongue. A crackling noise in the bushes had been the
only warning Feather-in-the-Wind had given of his approach. But his
companion was what surprised Bob.

Jerry again! Jerry, on whom the Indian was keeping a firm grip.

“I catch him. Not catch any other--Mexican.” The way the Indian said
the last word showed the contempt he felt for the boy who had sold out
his friends.

“Good! We’ll keep him until Boss Whitney can attend to his case.” Bob
rather expected Jerry to say something, but as there was no sound from
him, he continued:

“I think we’d better go back to camp. The shooting over there sounds as
if our part of the job is over. Think so?”

“Ugh!” grunted Feather-in-the-Wind, by way of saying yes. So, still
keeping his hold on Jerry, he led the way back to the Townsite. As
they marched, Bob suddenly realized that after the first yell and
charge from the Indians he had not heard or seen anything of them.

“Where are your young men?” he demanded of the Indian.

“I send ’em back. Watch Mexican house. Mebbeso white men need help. All
can do was scare Mexican. No got guns ’nough make fight.”

“No need to bother about the Greasers in camp. They won’t make any
trouble.” It was the first word spoken by their captive.

“Why?” flashed Bob, quick to take advantage of Jerry’s loosened lips.

“I’ll tell Mr. Whitney and no one else,” was the defiant answer.
Jerry’s first remark had evidently been surprised out of him and now he
was again in control of himself.

No amount of urging or surprise questions sufficed to break his silence
and the little party came to the lower camp before he had opened his
lips.

The place was in great confusion. The shooting, first of the Indians
and then of the soldiers, had thoroughly waked up the town. The center
of the activity seemed to be around the Mexican camp and when they
reached the outskirts of the crowd that was jostling together in the
street, they realized that the Mexicans were trapped, that if they had
been unwise enough to start something they were outnumbered three to
one. Here and there were Feather-in-the-Wind’s braves, ready for any
emergency.

The bunkhouses seemed deserted. If there were any Mexicans inside they
were doing their best to play dead. The crowd seemed to think that
the laborers were the ones who had started the trouble and they were
shouting, daring the Greasers to come out and start something. But
there was no answer from the inside.

Just as the crowd was growing weary, the roar of a high powered
gasoline engine drowned out the noise they were making. With the
muffler cut out open and the exhaust snapping explosions like the
reports of young cannon, a car dashed down the street and stopped with
a jerk. Out of it hopped Big Boss Whitney.

“What’s the rumpus?” he roared. “What’s broken loose?”

His presence dominated the crowd and for a moment there was comparative
quiet. Then everybody tried to explain at the same time and only
succeeded in confusing the man more. His eye, darting through the
crowd, fell on Bob and the others. “Here, Hazard,” he called, “tell me
quick what’s up!”

In a few words Bob sketched the happenings of the past few hours. When
he finished by saying that the cavalry had arrived on the scene and had
started chasing the Mexicans, the Chief breathed a sigh of relief.

“It’s all right then,” he muttered and stood up to reassure the crowd.

“All over, men. There’ll be no more trouble to-night. Our Mexicans are
not mixed up in this yet and the soldiers have come to see that they
don’t. They’ll be here any minute now!”

This satisfied the excited mob and gradually it thinned out as Whitney
demanded more details from Bob.

“Did you send me that wire to get up here as quickly as I could? It
caught me at Las Cruces just by chance.”

“No,” returned the boy. “I didn’t have time after things started to
break loose.”

“I wonder who did then. But I want to go to the troops. Which way did
they go?” But before Bob could answer, Mr. Whitney saw for the first
time that Jerry was being held prisoner by the Indian.

“But what does this mean?” he exclaimed. “What are you holding onto
King for?”

“He has been the go-between for the cattlemen and the Greasers,” said
Bob bitterly, sick that it was his job to tell of his former chum’s
treachery. “We’ve caught him, that’s all! When we’ve time I’ll tell you
the whole rotten thing.”

“Haven’t you anything to say for yourself?” snapped the man. “Is Bob
right?”

Jerry looked at the chief steadily and was about to reply when a yell
came to their ears.

“They’re coming!”

Before there was time to figure out who it was that was coming, the
hoofbeats and jangling of accouterments foretold the approach of the
troopers. A moment later the soldiers trotted down the street under
the electric lights that had been turned on when the trouble started.
In their midst were a number of sullen looking Mexicans, evidently
prisoners.

Mr. Whitney stepped out and halted the troop by hailing the captain,
who was in the lead. Tom noticed to his surprise that at the officer’s
side was Link O’Day, whom he had met as the foreman of Thaddeus
Holman’s ranch. What his appearance on the scene meant was more than
the boy could imagine.

The officer halted his men and after a brief talk with Mr. Whitney gave
some orders to his lieutenant. The Chief then turned to Bob.

“We’re going to my shack to talk this out. Come along. I want
Feather-in-the-Wind and Jerry too. Hoyt, find Mr. Taylor and ask him to
report to me at once!”

Link O’Day walked with the two men in the lead and all the way to the
house Bob racked his brain to find a reason for this man’s having
ridden into camp with the soldiers and on top of that to be included in
the conference the Chief had arranged.

The porch of the cottage was the spot chosen for the talk. When Taylor
joined the group Mr. Whitney opened the proceedings.

“With your permission, Captain Wendell, I would like to get the whole
sequence of events in order. You have told me that you have captured
the better part of the gang of raiders, so I will ask Bob Hazard to
tell me what led up to your timely intervention. Is that all right?
Hazard was in the midst of explaining the situation when you rode in,
and I’d like to hear the finish of his yarn.”

“Let him shoot!” was the answer.

“All right then, Bob,” encouraged Mr. Whitney. “Start from the
beginning and tell us everything that’s happened.”

So many days had passed during which Bob’s one desire had been to
unload his troubles on his Chief that he was not at all embarrassed
when he found he had to tell his tale before so many witnesses. He
started in and until he reached the episode of Miguel’s attempt to
blow up the coffer dam he spoke steadily and clearly. At this point,
however, when it was necessary to tell of the part he had taken in the
adventure, he began to stammer and hesitate. Feather-in-the-Wind broke
in to help him out and in his short, broken sentences vividly pictured
for the listeners the plucky deed that had been done to save the dam.

When he finished a ripple of admiration passed around the group, and to
cover his embarrassment, Bob hurriedly went on to tell of Jerry’s visit
and the surprise attack planned by Feather-in-the-Wind.

“That’s the story, Mr. Whitney,” he finished. “And as the dam is safe,
everything seems to be all right only, only--” Here the boy’s voice
broke--“the part about Jerry. I--I can’t understand how he could do
it--how--how he could be a traitor to the Service--”

“I can tell you!” the statement rang out from a corner of the porch.
Bob looked around to find that it was Link O’Day who had cried out.
“You can’t understand because Jerry is not a traitor!”

“What?” exclaimed Bob, amazed.

“What?” echoed Mr. Whitney, who had decided as he listened to Bob’s
story that the evidence against Jerry was sufficient to prove his guilt.

“No,” laughed the man. “I’m quite serious. Even in spite of all
appearances the boy is quite innocent of the charge. Am I right,
Captain Wendell?”

“You are!” returned the soldier. “Besides, I think he is very much to
be commended.”

“Please, please explain,” Bob implored. “I want to believe in him.”

“Yes,” Whitney said quickly, “the sooner any stain is removed from a
member of the Service the better. We are not used to traitors!”

“Well, then, it’s just this. Jerry was the first one of all of you to
smell trouble brewing. He had been coming up to the ranch and had heard
the rather good-natured grumbling that passed between all of us about
the damage the dam would do to our particular kind of business. Then
when Harper and Wesley--the men Hazard has told you about--began to
talk seriously to him he decided that it would be best if he did some
‘secret service’ work by seeming to fall in with their plans--”

Here Bob caused a sudden halt in the proceedings. Rushing over to Jerry
he held out his hand.

“Jerry, Jerry, old scout! I’m sorry as I can be. Forgive me for not
having faith in you. I wanted to all the time!”

The other boy’s response was quick and generous.

“I understood, Bob, how you felt. That is, all but once or twice
when--Oh, but what’s the use? Of course I forgive you!” When they had
shaken hands warmly the conference had a chance to proceed. O’Day took
up the narrative where he had left off.

“Jerry got into the confidence of the cowmen principally because they
needed him as a go-between and it was not until after he had all his
plans laid that I got into the game.”

“Link got onto me all right,” put in Jerry. “He started jawing me one
day about playing poker and before he got through I’d told him all
about it. I _hate_ playing cards and the only reason I did it at all
was to make Wesley and Harper believe that they had me thrown and tied.
I’m glad you did get on, though, Link, because I was getting tired of
playing the big game alone.”

“After that,” continued O’Day, “we held councils of war and decided
that it would be best if we could nip the big plot in the bud without
letting you fellows at the dam get wise.”

“What was the scheme the cattlemen had decided upon?” Whitney wanted to
know.

“To blow up as much of the works as possible. Have a raid by border
Mexicans take place simultaneously with a revolt by the laborers.”

“And are all the ranchers in on this?”

“By no means. Comparatively few. Thad Holman never knew a thing about
it. They were mostly dissatisfied cowboys and unsuccessful squatters
who saw profit for themselves in a war with Mexico.”

“I’m mighty glad of that,” said Whitney. “But go on; I won’t interrupt
any more.”

“Well, the signal for the trouble to start was to be the blowing up
of the cofferdam but it was slated to take place _to-morrow_ night
instead of to-night. The bandits have been on this side of the border
for several days, so the speeding up of the plan did not interfere with
_them_. What it did interfere with, however, was the plans Jerry and
I had laid to stop the plot’s being carried out. You, Hazard,” O’Day
smiled and pointed him out, “you were responsible for our troubles.”

“How?” Bob wanted to know.

“By coming up to the ranch and exciting the cowboys’ suspicions. They
made Jerry come with them to overtake you as you went home. If you had
not flared up, probably they would have let you go on home, but as it
was you gave them no choice but to hold you up. Then when you got away
they feared you knew more than was healthy. As they fled they got in
touch with the bandit chief and started the ball rolling a day earlier
than had been planned. Jerry got wind of it from Miguel only late
to-day. There was just a chance that he could ride to Fort Cummings in
time to get Captain Wendell and his troop here. First, however, he sent
that telegram to you, Mr. Whitney.”

“Thanks, Jerry,” Whitney said seriously. Bob happened to look around
and missed Feather-in-the-Wind from the group.

“Captain Wendell already had promised to be on hand for to-morrow
night. It was by his help that we expected to hold the lid on. But to
get back to Jerry: He had desperate little time to get to the Fort and
bring the soldiers back. It was a wonderful ride, but he made it. I
only joined the troop on the trail. Jerry had ridden ahead to stop
Miguel from blowing up the cofferdam.”

“And I was too late,” put in the boy. “Bob had beaten me to it. I was
sure some glad when I found the old wall was safe. It was the thing
I feared most as I rode for the soldiers--that Miguel would give the
signal before I could get back. I sort of had a hunch that it was Bob
who had had a hand in it and I went to his room to tell him I was on
his side. But you wouldn’t let me, Bob,” he finished.

“I know, Jerry, and I’m sorry.”

“Anyway,” Jerry went on, “when you chased me out I beat it for the
spot I’d agreed to meet Captain Wendell and guide him to the Mexicans’
hiding place. That is, after I’d attended to something--”

“And that was--?” suggested Mr. Whitney.

“Oh, I went to the Mexican bunkhouses and told Miguel’s bunch that he’d
sent me to tell ’em to meet him somewheres up the river. I sent ’em
just as far away as I could from the place trouble was likely to happen
without letting ’em get suspicious. They slipped out one at a time
before you doubled the guards, Mr. Taylor,” he finished with a smile.

“Then that was what you meant when you told us that the laborers
wouldn’t be any bother, was it?” asked Bob.

“Yes. All the men that were left were harmless. But as soon as I had
given the word, I was off to meet the captain. I thought he and his
bunch would never show up.”

“But when we did come it was our turn to be disappointed.” Here the
cavalry officer took up the story. “Bob Hazard and his friends had got
ahead of us too.”

“I’m sorry,” began the boy.

“Don’t be for a minute,” said Captain Wendell. “It was an excellent
piece of strategy and quite successful. I’ll admit, though, that it was
startling to hear the old Apache war whoop come so suddenly from the
darkness. Besides that, it forced us to chase our quarry rather than
slip up and surround it. But you couldn’t know that, of course, and as
we captured most of the band no harm was done.”

“But what happened to the rest? Did they get away?”

“Yes, for the most part, as their horses were fresher. While we were
rounding up the stragglers, the others were so far ahead I didn’t think
it worth while pursuing them further. But we’ve got enough to make an
example of. It’s been a good night’s work.”

“It certainly has,” said Mr. Whitney, “and it seems to me that my
thanks are due to everybody. I was away endeavoring to arrange for a
detachment of troops to come here and protect the project from just
what was about to happen. The trouble at Columbus mixed things up so
that they could not give me any definite promise and I thought it best
to stick around until I knew what could be expected. I believed that
nothing could happen up here so quickly--it was my mistake. But you
chaps have made it all right for me. I want to thank you all!”

The group was a little uncomfortable under the direct praise and
welcomed the diversion made by Feather-in-the-Wind’s rejoining them,
bringing with him a newcomer.

It was Miguel Philipe, who during the excitement had been left lying
bound in the bushes where the Indian had dumped him. When he was
brought under the light of the porch, he was a sorry looking specimen.
He had been unable to defend himself from the insects and his face was
puffed and mottled and his eyes almost closed.

“The poor beggar has sure been punished,” said the soldier.

“You bet,” Jerry said quickly. “Don’t you think he’s had enough, Boss
Whitney?”

“Perhaps, but--”

“And I sort of led him on,” interrupted the boy. “I’d like it a heap if
you’d let him go.”

Mr. Whitney was silent a minute as he thought over Jerry’s plea for the
captive.

“If I could be sure he wouldn’t do any more harm--”

“He no more make trouble,” put in the Indian gravely. “He scared too
much. I take him border. He no come back.”

“I think he is right,” agreed Captain Wendell. “Once he’s in Mexico it
will be a long time before he ever has nerve enough to slip back.”

“All right then, Jerry,” was Mr. Whitney’s decision. “I’ll leave it to
you and Feather-in-the-Wind to do with him as you like.”




CHAPTER XX

THE FUTURE


A few days later a detachment of infantry arrived to relieve Captain
Wendell and his men. The new troop was to stay permanently, as the
troubles at the border were continuing and Mr. Whitney had found it
impracticable to get laborers of any other nationality than Mexicans.

The bunch of Mexicans Jerry had sent off on the wild goose chase the
night of the raid came straggling into camp during the early hours of
the morning, to find that a tight ring of guards had been made around
their section of the lower camp. When they attempted to get through
they were put under arrest and during the day were loaded on a train
and shipped to the border to be sent back into their native country.
The captured bandits were delivered to General Pershing’s headquarters
to await trial.

Bob and Jerry were happy. The companionship which they had formed
during the days of the Labyrinth and which had been interrupted, now
was cemented still further. Ted Hoyt had been allowed by his father to
come back to the dam and the trio had great times together.

On Sundays Bob’s and Jerry’s usual plan was to go up to Thaddeus
Holman’s ranch and spend the day with Link O’Day, who had taken a great
fancy to Bob. Ted, of course, went home. But Bob realized that the
reason O’Day was good to him was that he was Jerry’s friend. There was
something more than comradeship between Jerry and the tall cattleman;
it was more the relation of a younger and elder brother.

This had a good effect on Jerry. It was as if he had found what he
had told Bob in the Labyrinth he most wanted--someone to belong to, a
family. He was becoming less serious, less self-contained.

Link O’Day talked a lot about the Northwest and especially of the
lumbering. He seemed to have a great love of forests. Jerry grew more
and more interested.

“I’d like that,” he said one day as the trio were loafing away the
afternoon in the shade of Holman’s bunkhouse, “and I think I’ll drift
up that way and tackle it.”

“And leave the Service?” put in Bob. “I don’t see how you could. It’s
the finest--”

“We know how _you_ feel!” Link O’Day laughed. “According to you,
Rockefeller hasn’t anything on the youngest cub of an engineer so long
as the cub is one of the Reclamation Service’s outfit. Therefore your
opinion isn’t worth anything in this case.”

“Seriously, Bob,” went on Jerry, “the Service is good stuff, but I
haven’t the same sort of feeling about it that you have. Boss Whitney
is great to work for and--and all that, but I’m not so sure that there
isn’t something else to do that I would like a heap better. This
forestry business, for instance. It listens good to me. Big trees, the
song of the band saws, all the rest of it Link has been telling us
about. And if Link would only go along--”

“Wouldn’t be surprised if I did,” said Link with a smile. “I’m getting
a little tired of cows now. If you really want to go, Jerry, I’ll start
along with you any time.”

“You will?” The boy was overjoyed. “That’s great! You’d better begin
getting your stuff together ’cause I’m going to call for you just as
soon as Boss Whitney will let me go.”

Bob made one last effort.

“But, Jerry, how about the Labyrinth? We found it--don’t you want to
have a hand in what happens next?”

For a moment Jerry seemed to hesitate. Then he answered:

“That’s the only thing I’ll really be sorry for--and leaving you, old
man. But after all, it was you who was responsible for the trip. I just
went because you dared me into it. No, Bob, if Link will go North with
me, I’ll have to pass up the Labyrinth.”

“All right,” said Bob laughing. “I reckon you’re lost. I’m beat, but I
sure hope you will find that you picked the right thing for yourself.”

The next day, when Jerry came to Mr. Whitney to tell him of his
decision, Bob was there. The engineer listened to the boy and when he
had finished told him that he could leave when it was most convenient.

“I’ve known for a long time, Jerry, that you were not a born engineer
like Bob Hazard here, but you’ve been a good rodman and I hate to lose
you. Besides, I won’t soon forget what you did for us in the Mexican
mix-up. But everyone must do what he thinks is best. Good luck to you!”

After Jerry left, the work went on smoothly and the main dam grew
higher and higher each day. Bob became proficient in the things Mr.
Whitney gave him to do and by the time summer came near its close he
felt that he had a good foundation of practical engineering on which to
build the theoretical knowledge he would get at college.

The Mexican situation was unchanged. The United States had not gone
into Mexico and the cattlemen still grumbled but did no more than that.
The presence of the soldiers was enough to keep the laborers in check.

For several weeks before the date Bob had set as the time he must
return to the East, he had received no letters from his father. Just as
he was about to be a little worried, something occurred which settled
all his fears.

Coming back from the job one night, he saw a strange yet familiar
figure sitting on the porch of the Quarter-house. When he got near
enough to see he started on the run towards the building.

“Dad! Dad! But I’m glad to see you!” he cried.

Unashamed, he put his arms around the man when he dashed up on the
veranda and asked a multitude of questions.

Mr. Hazard had grown lonely for his son and had come out to see him
on the job and to have the long ride homeward with him across the
continent.

“You see, son, I’ll lose you again right after we get home.”

“Why?” Bob wanted to know.

“Because Rensselaer Polytech opens a few days after we get back.”

“You’ve--you’ve fixed it for me to go there?” said Bob, realizing
that by letting him go to that particular institution, where only
engineering was taught, his father had given up all hope of his ever
being a lawyer. “That’s bully of you, Dad!”

“You said you wanted to go there,” was the simple answer.

That night Mr. Hazard and Bob had dinner with Mr. Whitney. The Chief
told the boy’s father all the things Bob had accomplished.

“He’s going to make a fine engineer, Mr. Hazard. You’ll be proud of
him.”

“I’m sure of that. I want to tell you now how proud I am of the
Reclamation Service and the things it’s doing. I’ve looked the Service
up and I’ve been to one or two projects that have been finished.”

“You have done that?” Bob said excitedly.

“Yes,” was the smiling answer, “and since I have seen for myself,
I’d rather Bob became an engineer on this Service than anything
else--excluding, of course, a lawyer!”

During the day or two that remained before Bob’s departure, Mr. Hazard
was shown the dam and all the things that made up its building. Bob was
busy saying good-bye to all the friends he had made.

Feather-in-the-Wind, while preserving his customary dignity, was
genuinely sorry to see him go.

“You will come back,” he said. “You have smelt desert. You have helped
build. You come back. I know. Feather-in-the-Wind will wait. Will be
glad when you come. Adios!”

When at last Bob was seated in the automobile ready to start for Engle
and the train that would carry him back to the East and college, a
great feeling of sadness swept over him. He took a last look at the dam
and the myriad activities that clustered around it, and he was sorry
that he had to go.

“Come on back next summer,” cried Ted Hoyt, who had been given a few
minutes from his work to bid his friend good-bye. “And perhaps I’ll go
East with you afterwards. My father says he might let me if I’m still
so loco about it!”

“That’s great! I sure hope he does. I’ll be back all right--that is, if
you’ll have a place for me,” Bob finished, speaking to Mr. Whitney who
had come up to the group.

“Don’t fret yourself about _that_, Bob. I’ll have a job for you all
right and one you’ll like,” said the engineer.

“What is it?” demanded the boy.

“To go as my aide on an official survey of the Labyrinth!”

“Then the folks in Washington have told you to go ahead on what Jerry
and I reported?”

“They have. I just received the letter in the last mail. I won’t be
able to get away from here until about the time your next vacation
comes, so it will work out just right. I can expect you, can’t I?”

Bob Hazard gave a joyous assent. A moment later the machine had started
and the scene of Bob’s first experience as an engineer was fading into
the distance. Ahead were the four years of endeavor that would fit him
to take his place with Mr. Whitney as a full-fledged engineer of the
Service.

As the machine slipped over the hilltop hiding the dam from sight, Bob
turned his eyes to the front. He was riding into the future, happy and
content.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOB HAZARD, DAM BUILDER ***

***** This file should be named 63918-0.txt or 63918-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/9/1/63918/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

